Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life





About the Author


			Shantideva (AD 687-763) was a renowned Indian Buddhist master who composed the Buddhist classic Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life (known in Sanskrit as Bodhisattvacharyavatara). A Bodhisattva is a friend of the world who, motivated by compassion, spontaneously seeks enlightenment to benefit all living beings.

			Original brush and ink paintings created especially by Chew Choon and Belinda Ho from Compassion Buddhist Centre in Malaysia.





About the Translators


			Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche is a fully accomplished meditation master and internationally renowned teacher of Buddhism who has pioneered the introduction of modern Buddhism into contemporary society. He is the author of 23 highly acclaimed books that perfectly transmit the ancient wisdom of Buddhism to our modern world. He has also founded over 1200 Kadampa Buddhist centres and groups throughout the world.

			Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life was translated under the guidance of Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche by Gen-la Kelsang Thubten.





Suggested study or reading order for beginners of books by Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche


			How to Transform Your Life

			How to Understand the Mind

			Joyful Path of Good Fortune

			The Mirror of Dharma with Additions

			The New Heart of Wisdom

			Modern Buddhism

			Tantric Grounds and Paths

			The New Guide to Dakini Land

			Essence of Vajrayana

			The Oral Instructions of Mahamudra

			Great Treasury of Merit

			The New Eight Steps to Happiness

			Introduction to Buddhism

			How to Solve Our Human Problems

			Meaningful to Behold

			The Bodhisattva Vow

			Universal Compassion

			The New Meditation Handbook

			Living Meaningfully, Dying Joyfully

			Ocean of Nectar

			Heart Jewel

			Clear Light of Bliss

			Mahamudra Tantra





		 			SHANTIDEVA’S

			Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life

			HOW TO ENJOY A LIFE OF GREAT MEANING AND ALTRUISM

			Originally translated and revised from Sanskrit into Tibetan by several translators, including Dharmashribhadra, Rinchen Sangpo, Shakyamati, Sumatikirti and Loden Sherab.

			This present translation from Tibetan into English was rendered by Gen-la Kelsang Thubten under the compassionate guidance of Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche.





		 			 THARPA PUBLICATIONS

			UK • US • CANADA

			AUSTRALIA • ASIA





		 			First published in 2002 - 5 Impressions

			Second edition 2018 - Impression 2 (2019)

			Digital edition first published 2014

			This digital edition published 2020

			All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means except for the quotation of brief passages for the purpose of private

			study, research, or review.



		 			Tharpa Publications UK Office

			Conishead Priory

			Ulverston, Cumbria

			LA12 9QQ, England

			Tharpa Publications US Office

			47 Sweeney Road

			Glen Spey

			NY 12737, USA



		 			There are Tharpa Publications offices around the world,

			and Tharpa books are published in most major languages.

			See here for contact details.



		 			© The New Kadampa Tradition – International Kadampa Buddhist Union 2002, 2018

			Chapter illustrations by Mr. Chew Choon.

			Cover painting by Ms. Belinda Ho.

			Library of Congress Control Number: 2012953550

			British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

			A catalogue record for this book is

			available from the British Library.

			ISBN 978-0948006-88-3 – paperback

			ISBN 978-1-910368-13-8 – ePub





		 			Contents

			About the Author

			Suggested study or reading order for beginners of books by Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche

			Introduction

			Chapter 1: An Explanation of the Benefits of Bodhichitta

			Chapter 2: Purifying Negativity

			Chapter 3: Generating Engaging Bodhichitta

			Chapter 4: Relying upon Conscientiousness

			Chapter 5: Guarding the Mind with Alertness

			Chapter 6: Relying upon Patience

			Chapter 7: Relying upon Effort

			Chapter 8: Relying upon Mental Stabilization

			Chapter 9: The Perfection of Wisdom

			Chapter 10: Dedication

			Glossary

			Bibliography

			Study Programmes of Kadampa Buddhism

			Tharpa Offices Worldwide

			Index

			The International Temples Project

			Finding Your Nearest Kadampa Meditation Centre





Introduction


			The Buddhist masterpiece called Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life was composed by Bodhisattva Shantideva, a great Buddhist Master who lived in the eighth century AD. This holy scripture is a very practical guide that teaches us how to enter, make progress on, and complete the Buddhist path to enlightenment. It is a condensation of all Buddha’s teachings and it shows clearly how these teachings can be integrated into our daily life.

			Shantideva’s Guide has been the inspiration of many great spiritual works, such as Eight Verses of Training the Mind by the great Kadampa Teacher Langri Tangpa, and Training the Mind in Seven Points by Bodhisattva Chekhawa. Both these texts explain how to cherish others, equalize self and others, and exchange self with others, how to practise ‘taking and giving’, and how to transform adverse conditions into methods for attaining liberation. All these teachings are extracted from Shantideva’s Guide. Many Kadampa practitioners keep Shantideva’s teachings in their hearts, and Je Tsongkhapa and his disciples greatly praised Shantideva’s work.

			Through studying many Buddhist texts we may become a renowned scholar; but, if we do not put Buddha’s teachings – the Dharma – into practice, our understanding of Buddhism will remain hollow, with no power to solve our own or others’ problems. Expecting intellectual understanding of Dharma alone to solve our problems is like a sick person hoping to cure his or her illness through merely reading medical instructions without actually taking the medicine. As Shantideva says in the fifth chapter:

			(109)	We need to put Buddha’s teachings, the Dharma, into practice

			Because nothing can be accomplished just by reading words.

			A sick man will never be cured of his illness

			Through merely reading medical instructions!

			Each and every living being has the sincere wish to avoid permanently all suffering and problems. We normally try to do this by using external methods, but no matter how successful we are from a worldly point of view – no matter how materially wealthy, powerful or highly respected we become – we will never find permanent liberation from suffering and problems. Suffering, pain, unhappiness and problems do not exist outside the mind. They are unpleasant feelings, and feelings are types of mind. Only by transforming our mind can we eliminate suffering and problems permanently. The method for doing this is explained clearly in Shantideva’s Guide.

			In reality, all the problems we experience day to day come from our self-cherishing and self-grasping – misconceptions that exaggerate our own importance. However, because we do not understand this, we normally blame others for our problems, and this just makes them worse. From these two basic misconceptions arise all our other delusions, such as anger and attachment, causing us to experience endless problems. We can solve all of these problems by sincerely practising the instructions presented in this book. At least we should memorize from each chapter those verses we find most helpful, and contemplate their meaning again and again until our mind becomes peaceful and positive. We should then try to maintain this peaceful state of mind day and night without interruption. By doing this, we will experience a happy and meaningful life.

			We should read this book with a happy mind, free from distraction and negative views. It is also very important to improve our understanding of Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life by studying commentaries such as Meaningful to Behold. Through sincerely practising these instructions we can transform our ordinary, self-centred intentions into the supreme good heart, our ordinary, confused view into profound wisdom, and our ordinary way of life into a Bodhisattva’s way of life. In this way, we will attain the supreme inner peace of enlightenment, which is the real meaning of our human life.

			Geshe Kelsang Gyatso,

			USA,

			April 2002.





		 			In Sanskrit: Bodhisattvacharyavatara

			In Tibetan: Jang chub sem pai cho pa la jug pa

			In English: Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life





Chapter 1: An Explanation of the Benefits of Bodhichitta





		 			Whereas all other virtues are like plantain trees,

			In that they are exhausted once they bear fruit,

			The enduring celestial tree of bodhichitta

			Is not exhausted but increases by bearing fruit.





		 			CHAPTER 1

			An Explanation of the Benefits of Bodhichitta

			Homage to the enlightened Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.

			(1)	I prostrate to the enlightened Buddhas endowed with the Truth Body,

			And to the Bodhisattvas and all other objects of prostration.

			I will explain briefly, in accordance with the Scriptures,

			How to engage in the condensed practices of the Bodhisattva.

			(2)	There is nothing written here that has not been explained before,

			And I have no special skills in composition.

			My reason for writing this is to benefit others

			And to keep my mind acquainted.

			(3)	Thus, the strength of my faith and my virtuous realizations

			Might for a while be increased by this,

			And perhaps others who are as fortunate as I

			Might also find this meaningful to behold.

			(4)	This precious human life, so hard to find,

			Offers the ultimate goal for living beings.

			If we do not strive to accomplish this goal now,

			How will such a precious opportunity arise again?

			(5)	Just as on a dark and cloudy night

			A flash of lightning for a moment illuminates all,

			So for the worldly, through the power of Buddha’s blessings,

			A virtuous intention occasionally and briefly occurs.

			(6)	Thus, while our virtues are mostly weak,

			Our non-virtues are extremely strong and fearsome.

			Other than bodhichitta – a compassionate mind wishing for enlightenment –

			What virtue can overcome the heaviest evils?

			(7)	The Able Ones, the Buddhas, who have considered this for many aeons,

			Have all seen bodhichitta to be the most beneficial

			Because, through it, countless masses of living beings

			Can easily attain the supreme bliss of enlightenment.

			(8)	Those who wish to destroy their own suffering,

			Those who wish to dispel the suffering of others,

			And those who wish to experience much happiness

			Should never forsake the practice of bodhichitta.

			(9)	The moment bodhichitta is generated

			Even in pitiful beings bound within the prison of samsara,

			They become Bodhisattvas – a ‘Son or Daughter of Buddha’ –

			And are worthy of veneration by humans and worldly gods.

			(10)	Just like the supreme elixir that transmutes into gold,

			Bodhichitta can transform this impure body we have taken

			Into the priceless jewel of a Buddha’s form.

			Therefore, firmly maintain bodhichitta.

			(11)	Since the limitless wisdom of Buddha, the Sole Navigator of living beings,

			Upon thorough investigation has seen its preciousness,

			Those who wish to be free from samsara’s suffering

			Should firmly maintain this precious mind of bodhichitta.

			(12)	Whereas all other virtues are like plantain trees,

			In that they are exhausted once they bear fruit,

			The enduring celestial tree of bodhichitta

			Is not exhausted but increases by bearing fruit.

			(13)	Just as when those who are greatly afraid rely upon a courageous one,

			Whoever relies upon bodhichitta will immediately be freed from danger

			Even if they have committed unbearable evils;

			So why do the conscientious not rely upon it?

			(14)	Just like the fire at the end of the aeon,

			In an instant it completely consumes all great evil.

			Its countless benefits were explained by the wise Protector Maitreya

			To Bodhisattva Sudhana.

			(15)	In brief, you should know

			That bodhichitta has two types:

			The mind that observes enlightenment and aspires,

			And the mind that observes enlightenment and engages.

			(16)	Just as the distinction between wishing to go

			And actually going is understood,

			So, respectively, the wise should understand

			The difference between these two bodhichittas.

			(17)	From the mind that aspires to enlightenment,

			Great effects arise while in samsara;

			But an uninterrupted flow of good fortune does not ensue

			As it does from the engaging mind.

			(18)	For whoever takes up the engaging mind of bodhichitta

			With the intention never to turn back

			From completely liberating

			The infinite living beings throughout all realms,

			(19)	From that time forth, for him there will arise –

			Even if he is asleep or apparently unconcerned –

			Vast and powerful merit, equal to space,

			That flows without interruption.

			(20)	For the sake of those with lesser inclinations,

			These benefits were explained with logical reasons

			By the Tathagata himself

			In Sutra Requested by Subahu.

			(21)	If even the thought to relieve

			The headaches of others

			Is a beneficial intention

			That results in infinite merit,

			(22)	What can be said of the wish

			To dispel the immeasurable misery

			Of each and every living being

			And lead them all to countless good qualities?

			(23)	Does our father or mother

			Have such a beneficial intention as this?

			Do the gods or the sages?

			Does even Brahma himself?

			(24)	If, before generating bodhichitta, these living beings

			Do not even dream of such a mind

			For their own sakes,

			How will they develop it for the sake of others?

			(25)	This mind to benefit living beings,

			Which does not arise in others even for their own sakes,

			Is an extraordinary jewel of a mind,

			Whose birth is an unprecedented wonder.

			(26)	How can we possibly measure

			The benefits of this jewel of a mind –

			The source of joy for all living beings

			And the cure for all their sufferings?

			(27)	If the mere intention to benefit others

			Is more meritorious than making offerings to the Buddhas,

			What can be said of actually striving

			For the happiness of every single living being?

			(28)	Although living beings wish to be free from suffering,

			They run straight towards the causes of suffering;

			And although they wish for happiness,

			Out of ignorance they destroy it like a foe.

			(29)	For those who are deprived of happiness

			And afflicted with many sorrows,

			Bodhichitta bestows upon them boundless joy,

			Eradicates all their suffering,

			(30)	And even dispels their confusion.

			Where is there virtue equal to this?

			Where is there even such a friend?

			Where is there merit such as this?

			(31)	If even someone who repays a kindness

			Is worthy of some praise,

			What can be said of the Bodhisattva who helps others

			Regardless of whether or not they help him?

			(32)	If someone regularly, or even just once,

			Gives food in a disdainful manner,

			Which satisfies a few beings for only half a day,

			People honour him or her as virtuous;

			(33)	So what can be said of one who eternally gives

			To countless living beings

			The everlasting, unsurpassed bliss of the Sugatas,

			Fulfilling all their wishes?

			(34)	Buddha said that whoever generates an evil mind

			Towards a Bodhisattva, a supreme benefactor,

			Will remain in hell for as many aeons

			As the moments for which that evil mind was generated;

			(35)	But, for whoever generates a pure mind of faith,

			The effects of good fortune will increase even more than that.

			Even when Bodhisattvas are faced with great adversity,

			Negativity does not arise; rather, their virtues naturally increase.

			(36)	I prostrate to those who have generated

			The holy, precious mind of bodhichitta;

			And I go for refuge to those sources of happiness

			Who bestow bliss even upon those who harm them.

			This concludes the first chapter of Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, entitled ‘An Explanation of the Benefits of Bodhichitta’.





Chapter 2: Purifying Negativity





		 			To maintain this precious mind of bodhichitta,

			I make excellent offerings ...

			Lakes and pools adorned with lotuses,

			And the beautiful call of wild geese;





		 			CHAPTER 2

			Purifying Negativity

			(1)	To maintain this precious mind of bodhichitta,

			I make excellent offerings to the oceans of good qualities –

			The Buddhas, the stainless jewel of the holy Dharma,

			And the assembly of Bodhisattvas.

			(2)	However many flowers and fruits there are,

			And all the different types of medicine;

			All the jewels there are in the world,

			And all the pure, refreshing waters;

			(3)	Mountains of jewels, forest groves,

			And quiet and joyful places;

			Heavenly trees adorned with flowers,

			And trees whose branches hang with delicious fruits;

			(4)	Scents that come from the celestial realms,

			Incense, wish-granting trees and jewelled trees;

			Harvests that need no cultivation,

			And all ornaments that are suitable to be offered;

			(5)	Lakes and pools adorned with lotuses,

			And the beautiful call of wild geese;

			Everything that is unowned

			Throughout all worlds as extensive as space –

			(6)	Holding these in my mind, I offer them well

			To the supreme beings, the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.

			O Compassionate Ones, holy objects of offering,

			Think of me kindly and accept what I offer.

			(7)	Lacking merit, I am destitute

			And have nothing else that I can offer;

			Therefore, O Protectors, who think of the welfare of others,

			Please accept these for my sake.

			(8)	Eternally I will offer all my bodies

			To the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.

			Out of respect, I will become your servant;

			Please accept me, O Supreme Heroes.

			(9)	Being completely under your care,

			I will benefit living beings with no fear of samsara.

			I will purify my previous evils

			And in future I will commit no more.

			(10)	Within this sweetly scented bathing chamber

			With a clear and glistening crystal floor,

			Majestic pillars ablaze with jewels,

			And canopies of radiant pearls spread aloft;

			(11)	With many jewelled vases filled to the brim

			With scented waters that steal the mind,

			And to the accompaniment of music and song,

			I offer ablution to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.

			(12)	I dry their bodies with matchless cloths

			That are immaculately clean and scented.

			Then I offer to the holy beings

			Fragrant garments in magnificent colours.

			(13)	With various excellent raiments, fine and smooth,

			And a multitude of supreme ornaments,

			I adorn Arya Samantabhadra,

			Manjushri, Avalokiteshvara and all the others.

			(14)	Just like polishing pure, refined gold,

			I anoint the radiant bodies of all the Able Ones

			With supreme perfumes whose fragrance pervades

			Every part of the three thousand worlds.

			(15)	To the Able Ones, the supreme objects of offering,

			I offer all the beautiful, scented flowers –

			Mandaras, upalas, lotuses and so forth –

			And exquisite garlands, finely arranged.

			(16)	I offer them vast and fragrant clouds

			Of supreme incense that steal the mind;

			And I offer delicacies of the gods,

			Together with a variety of food and drink.

			(17)	I also offer jewelled lamps

			Arranged on golden lotuses;

			And on polished ground sprinkled with scent

			And scattered with beautiful flower petals,

			(18)	I offer to those with the nature of compassion

			A celestial palace resounding with heavenly praise

			And hung with beautiful pearls and jewelled ornaments

			Whose infinite radiance illuminates space.

			(19)	Eternally I will offer to the Able Ones

			Exquisite jewelled parasols held aloft,

			With pleasing shapes, handles of gold,

			And rims embellished with beautiful ornaments.

			(20)	In addition to these, may masses of offerings

			Resounding with music and beautiful melodies

			Remain like so many clouds that send down relief

			To suffering living beings.

			(21)	And upon all the holy Dharma Jewels,

			The stupas, and the images,

			May there fall an uninterrupted rain

			Of flowers, jewels and so forth.

			(22)	Just as Manjushri, Samantabhadra, and others

			Made offerings to the Conquerors,

			So do I make offerings to the Sugatas, the Protectors,

			And to the Bodhisattvas.

			(23)	To these oceans of good qualities,

			I offer a melodious ocean of praise.

			May a chorus of sweet-sounding melodious verses

			Always ascend to their presence.

			(24)	To all the Buddhas abiding in the three times,

			The Dharma and the Supreme Assembly,

			I prostrate with as many emanated bodies

			As there are atoms in all the worlds.

			(25)	I prostrate to the bases for generating bodhichitta,

			To the images of Buddha’s body, speech and mind,

			To the Abbots and Preceptors,

			And to the supreme practitioners on the path.

			(26)	Until I attain the essence of great enlightenment,

			I will go for refuge to the Buddhas;

			Likewise, I will go for refuge to Dharma

			And to the assembly of Bodhisattvas.

			(27)	With my palms pressed together, I make requests

			To those endowed with great compassion –

			The perfect Buddhas and the Bodhisattvas,

			Who abide throughout the ten directions.

			(28)	Since beginningless time in samsara,

			Throughout this and all my previous lives,

			Out of ignorance I have committed evil,

			Ordered it to be committed,

			(29)	And, overwhelmed by deceptive ignorance,

			Rejoiced in its being committed by others.

			Seeing all these to be grave mistakes,

			From the depths of my heart I confess them to the holy beings.

			(30)	Whatever harmful actions of body, speech or mind

			I have done under the influence of delusion

			Towards the Three Precious Jewels,

			My father and mother, my Spiritual Guide, and others –

			(31)	All the extremely unbearable evil actions

			Committed by me, an evil person

			Polluted by many faults –

			I confess before the Deliverers, the enlightened beings.

			(32)	But I might die before I purify

			All my negativities;

			O Please protect me so that I

			May surely and swiftly be freed from them.

			(33)	Since the untrustworthy Lord of Death

			Will not wait while I purify my evils,

			Regardless of whether I am sick or not,

			This momentary life is unreliable.

			(34)	I shall have to leave everything and depart alone

			But, through failing to understand this,

			I have committed many kinds of evil action

			With respect to my friends and others.

			(35)	And yet my friends will become nothing

			And others will also become nothing.

			Even I shall become nothing;

			Likewise, everything will become nothing.

			(36)	Just like an experience in a dream,

			Everything I now enjoy

			Will become a mere recollection,

			For what has passed cannot be seen again.

			(37)	Even during this brief life,

			Many friends and others have passed away;

			But the unbearable results of the evil I have committed for their sake

			Still lie ahead of me.

			(38)	Thus, through failing to realize

			That I shall suddenly die,

			I have committed many evils

			Out of ignorance, attachment and anger.

			(39)	Remaining still neither day nor night,

			This life is continuously slipping away

			And never increases in duration;

			So why should death not come to one such as me?

			(40)	Even if, as I lie on my deathbed,

			I am surrounded by friends and relatives,

			I alone shall have to experience

			The feeling of my life being severed.

			(41)	Of what help will my companions be

			When I am seized by the messengers of the Lord of Death?

			At that time, only merit will protect me,

			But upon that I have not relied.

			(42)	O Protectors, oblivious to dangers such as these,

			I, who am devoid of conscientiousness,

			Have committed many negative actions

			For the sake of this transient life.

			(43)	Terrified is the person who today is led away

			To a place where his limbs will be torn from his body.

			With a dry mouth and sunken eyes,

			His appearance is completely distorted.

			(44)	So what need is there to mention the terrible despair

			I shall experience when, stricken by great panic,

			I am seized by the physical apparitions

			Of the terrifying messengers of the Lord of Death?

			(45)	‘Who can grant me real protection

			From this great terror?’

			Petrified, with wide, bulging eyes,

			I shall search for refuge in all directions,

			(46)	But, seeing no refuge anywhere,

			I shall become utterly dejected.

			If I cannot find refuge there,

			What shall I do at that time?

			(47)	Therefore, from today I go for refuge

			To the Conqueror Buddhas who protect living beings,

			Who seek to give refuge to all living beings,

			And who, with their great strength, eradicate all fear.

			(48)	Likewise, I sincerely go for refuge

			To the Dharma they have realized,

			Which dispels the fears of samsara,

			And to the assembly of Bodhisattvas.

			(49)	Overcome with fear, I offer myself

			To Arya Samantabhadra,

			And I offer my body into the service

			Of Arya Manjushri.

			(50)	To Protector Avalokiteshvara,

			Who acts unerringly out of compassion,

			I utter this desperate cry for help:

			‘O Please protect me, an evildoer!’

			(51)	Seeking refuge, from my heart

			I pray to Arya Akashagarbha,

			To Arya Ksitigarbha,

			And to all the compassionate Protectors.

			(52)	I go for refuge to Arya Vajrapani,

			Upon sight of whom all harmful beings,

			Such as the messengers of the Lord of Death,

			Flee in terror to the four directions.

			(53)	Previously I transgressed your advice,

			But now, having seen these great dangers,

			I go to you for refuge

			To quickly dispel my fears.

			(54)	If I need to follow the doctor’s advice

			When frightened by an ordinary illness,

			How much more necessary is it to follow Buddha’s advice

			When perpetually afflicted by the many harmful diseases of the delusions?

			(55)	If all the people living in this world

			Can be greatly harmed by just one of these delusions,

			And if no medicine other than Dharma

			Can be found anywhere to cure them,

			(56)	Those who do not act in accordance with the Dharma teachings

			Given by Buddha, the all-knowing physician,

			Through which all pains of the delusions can be removed,

			Are surely foolish and confused.

			(57)	If it is necessary to exercise caution

			When near a small, ordinary precipice,

			How much more necessary is it when near the fathomless pits of hell

			Into which I could fall for a very long time?

			(58)	It is unwise to indulge in pleasures,

			Thinking, ‘At least I shall not die today’;

			For without doubt the time will come

			When I shall become nothing.

			(59)	Who will grant me fearlessness?

			How can I be freed from these fears?

			If I shall inevitably become nothing,

			How can I continue to indulge?

			(60)	What remains with me now from the pleasant experiences

			Of my previous lives that have now ceased?

			And yet, because of my strong attachment to worldly pleasures,

			I have gone against the advice of my Spiritual Guide.

			(61)	If, when I depart from this life

			And from my friends and relatives,

			I must wander all alone,

			Why commit non-virtue for the sake of friends and enemies?

			(62)	‘How can I definitely be freed

			From non-virtue, the source of all suffering?’

			Throughout the day and the night,

			I should think only about this.

			(63)	Whatever I have done

			Out of unknowing and confusion –

			Be it a natural non-virtue

			Or a transgression –

			(64)	With my palms pressed together

			And my mind fearful of suffering,

			Prostrating myself again and again,

			I confess them all before the Protectors.

			(65)	I request all the holy beings

			To free me from all my evils and faults;

			And since these bring only harmful results,

			In future I will not commit them again.

			This concludes the second chapter of Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, entitled ‘Purifying Negativity’.





Chapter 3: Generating Engaging Bodhichitta





		 			Just as it is rare indeed

			For a blind person to find a jewel in a heap of rubbish,

			So too, by some very rare chance,

			I have generated bodhichitta.





		 			CHAPTER 3

			Generating Engaging Bodhichitta

			(1)	With great gladness I rejoice

			In the virtues that protect living beings

			From the sufferings of the lower realms

			And lead all those who suffer to fortunate realms.

			(2)	I rejoice in the accumulation of virtue

			That releases living beings from samsaric rebirth

			And leads them to the state of nirvana –

			The supreme, permanent inner peace.

			(3)	I rejoice in the enlightenment of the Conqueror Buddhas

			And in the spiritual paths of the Bodhisattvas.

			(4)	With delight I rejoice in the ocean of virtue

			That arises from generating the mind of enlightenment, bodhichitta,

			Which brings happiness to all living beings,

			And in the deeds that benefit those beings.

			(5)	To the Buddhas residing in all directions,

			With my palms pressed together I make this request:

			Please continue to shine the lamp of Dharma

			For living beings lost and suffering in the darkness of ignorance.

			(6)	To the Conquerors who wish to enter parinirvana,

			With my palms pressed together I make this request:

			Please do not leave living beings in a state of blindness,

			But remain with us for countless aeons.

			(7)	Thus, through the merit I have collected

			From all these virtuous actions,

			May the suffering of every living being

			Be brought completely to an end;

			(8)	And until all those who are sick

			Have been cured of their illness,

			May I become their medicine,

			Their doctor and their nurse.

			(9)	May a rain of food and drink descend

			To dispel the miseries of hunger and thirst;

			And during the great aeon of famine,

			May I become their food and drink.

			(10)	May I become an inexhaustible treasury

			For the poor and destitute.

			May I be everything they might need,

			Placed freely at their disposal.

			(11)	From this moment on, without any sense of loss,

			I shall give away my body and likewise my wealth,

			And my virtues amassed throughout the three times

			To help all living beings, my mothers.

			(12)	Through giving all, I shall attain the nirvana of a Buddha

			And my bodhichitta wishes will be fulfilled.

			I give up everything for the sake of living beings,

			Who are the supreme objects of giving.

			(13)	Since I have given up this body

			For the happiness of living beings,

			It will always be theirs to beat, to revile

			Or even to kill if they please.

			(14)	Even if they play with it,

			Mock it or humiliate it,

			Since I have given this body to others,

			What is the point of holding it dear?

			(15)	Therefore, in whatever I do,

			I will never cause harm to others;

			And whenever anyone encounters me,

			May it never be meaningless for them.

			(16)	Whether those who encounter me

			Generate faith or anger,

			May it always be the cause

			Of their fulfilling all their wishes.

			(17)	May all those who harm me –

			Whether verbally or by other means –

			And those who otherwise insult me

			Thereby create the cause to attain enlightenment.

			(18)	May I become a protector for the protectorless,

			A guide for those who travel on the road,

			And, for those who wish to cross the water,

			May I become a boat, a ship or a bridge.

			(19)	May I become an island for those seeking dry land,

			A lamp for those needing light,

			A place of rest for those who desire one,

			And a servant for those needing service.

			(20)	To benefit all living beings,

			May I become a treasury of wealth,

			Powerful mantras, potent medicine,

			A wish-fulfilling tree and a wish-granting cow.

			(21)	Just like the great elements such as earth,

			And like eternal space,

			May I become the basis from which everything arises

			For sustaining the life of countless living beings;

			(22)	And, until they have passed beyond sorrow,

			May I sustain all forms of life

			Throughout the realms of living beings

			That reach to the ends of space.

			(23)	Just as all the previous Sugatas, the Buddhas,

			Generated the mind of enlightenment, bodhichitta,

			And accomplished all the stages

			Of the Bodhisattva’s training,

			(24)	So will I too, for the sake of all beings,

			Generate the mind of enlightenment

			And accomplish all the stages

			Of the Bodhisattva’s training.

			(25)	The wise who have sincerely taken up

			The mind of enlightenment in this way,

			So as to maintain it and increase it

			Should encourage themselves as follows.

			(26)	Now my life has borne great fruit,

			My human life has attained great meaning;

			Today I am born into the lineage of Buddha

			And have become a Bodhisattva.

			(27)	All my actions from now on

			Shall accord with this noble lineage;

			And upon this lineage, pure and faultless,

			I shall never bring disgrace.

			(28)	Just as it is rare indeed

			For a blind person to find a jewel in a heap of rubbish,

			So too, by some very rare chance,

			I have generated bodhichitta.

			(29)	It is the supreme nectar that overcomes

			The dominion of death over living beings,

			And an inexhaustible treasury

			That dispels all their poverty.

			(30)	It is the supreme medicine that relieves

			The sickness of living beings,

			And a shady tree that provides shelter

			For weary beings travelling samsara’s paths.

			(31)	It is a universal bridge by which all living beings

			Can be delivered from the lower realms,

			And a rising moon of a mind

			That relieves the torment of their delusions.

			(32)	It is a vast sun that completely dispels

			The fog of unknowing from living beings.

			It is the quintessential butter that arises

			When the milk of Dharma is churned.

			(33)	For the honoured guests, the beings on samsara’s paths

			Who wish to enjoy the delights of bliss,

			Bodhichitta will satisfy them all

			By leading them to the supreme state of bliss.

			(34)	Today, in the presence of all the Protectors,

			I invite all living beings to be my guests

			To enjoy these temporary and ultimate delights.

			May gods, demi-gods and everyone else be joyful!

			This concludes the third chapter of Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, entitled ‘Generating Engaging Bodhichitta’.





Chapter 4: Relying upon Conscientiousness





		 			It is for these reasons that Buddha, the Blessed One, said

			That it is extremely difficult to obtain a precious human life;

			Just as it is rare for a turtle to insert its neck

			Into a yoke adrift on a vast ocean.





		 			CHAPTER 4

			Relying upon Conscientiousness

			(1)	A practitioner who has firmly generated

			Aspiring and engaging bodhichitta in this way

			Should always apply effort without wavering

			So as not to stray from the trainings.

			(2)	If an ordinary action is undertaken in haste

			Or without being well thought out,

			It might be appropriate to reconsider,

			Even if a promise has been made;

			(3)	But how could I possibly turn back

			From something that has been examined

			By the wisdom of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas,

			And that I too have repeatedly examined?

			(4)	If, having made the bodhichitta promise,

			I do not actually put it into practice,

			Since I shall be deceiving all these living beings,

			What sort of rebirth shall I then take?

			(5)	It is said that someone who, out of miserliness,

			Does not give even the smallest ordinary thing

			That he or she has dedicated to others

			Will be reborn as a hungry spirit.

			(6)	So, if I were to deceive all living beings,

			Whom from the depths of my heart I have invited

			To be guests at the banquet of enlightenment,

			How could I take a fortunate rebirth in the future?

			(7)	How someone who abandons bodhichitta

			Can then attain liberation

			Is beyond ordinary comprehension –

			Only the omniscient can know that.

			(8)	For a Bodhisattva, abandoning bodhichitta

			Is the heaviest of all downfalls

			For, should he or she incur it,

			The whole basis of working for others will be lost.

			(9)	And if someone else were to obstruct or hinder

			A Bodhisattva’s virtuous actions, even for a moment,

			Since he would be undermining the welfare of all living beings,

			There would be no end to his lower rebirths.

			(10)	For if I would experience misfortune

			As a result of destroying the happiness of just one being,

			What can be said of the consequences of destroying

			The happiness of all living beings as extensive as space?

			(11)	Those who repeatedly renew their Bodhisattva vow

			Only to go on to incur further downfalls

			Will remain for a long time enmeshed in samsara,

			Obstructed from attaining higher spiritual grounds.

			(12)	Therefore, I must practise sincerely,

			In accordance with the promise I have made.

			If, from now on, I make no effort,

			I shall be reborn in lower and lower states.

			(13)	Even though there have been countless Buddhas in the past

			Working to benefit all living beings,

			Because I have so many karmic obstacles

			I have not been a direct object of their care;

			(14)	And, if I remain like this,

			Again and again I shall have to experience

			Sickness, incarceration, laceration,

			And mutilation in the lower realms.

			(15)	Since the appearance of a Tathagata – a Buddha,

			Faith in his teachings, a precious human body,

			And a suitable basis for practising Dharma are so rare,

			When will an opportunity like this arise again?

			(16)	Today, for example, I might be free from sickness,

			Well-nourished and without afflictions;

			But this life is fleeting and deceptive,

			And my body is as if borrowed for a moment.

			(17)	If I engage in non-virtuous actions,

			I shall not obtain a human body again;

			And if I do not attain a human form,

			There will be no virtue, only negativity.

			(18)	If I do not practise virtue now

			While I have the good fortune to do so,

			What virtue shall I be able to practise

			When I am suffering and confused in the lower realms?

			(19)	For if I do not practise virtue

			But accumulate only evil,

			I shall not even hear the words ‘fortunate rebirth’

			For a hundred million aeons.

			(20)	It is for these reasons that Buddha, the Blessed One, said

			That it is extremely difficult to obtain a precious human life;

			Just as it is rare for a turtle to insert its neck

			Into a yoke adrift on a vast ocean.

			(21)	Since just one moment of evil

			Can lead to an aeon in the deepest hell,

			If I do not purify all the evil I have collected since beginningless time,

			It goes without saying that I shall not take a human rebirth.

			(22)	Simply experiencing the effects of my non-virtue

			Will not lead to my being released from the lower realms,

			For, while I am experiencing those effects,

			I shall be generating yet more non-virtue.

			(23)	If, having found the freedom and endowment of a human life,

			I do not strive to practise Dharma,

			There can be no greater self-deception,

			There can be no greater folly.

			(24)	Having understood this,

			If out of ignorance I remain indolent,

			Then, when the time comes for me to die,

			I shall be choked with unimaginable terror.

			(25)	If my body will burn for a very long time

			In the unbearable fires of hell,

			Then, without doubt, my mind will be consumed

			By the raging fires of regret.

			(26)	Having found, by some very slight chance,

			This beneficial state, so rare to find,

			If, while I am endowed with such good fortune,

			I am once again led to the hells,

			(27)	It is as if I am confused by a spell

			And my mind has been reduced to nothing!

			Even I do not know what causes this confusion –

			What is it that dwells within me?

			(28)	The inner enemies of hatred, attachment and so forth

			Do not have arms and legs,

			Nor do they have courage or skill;

			So how have they made me their slave?

			(29)	While they remain within my mind,

			They harm me at their pleasure,

			And yet, without anger, I patiently endure them.

			How shameful! This is no occasion for patience.

			(30)	If all living beings, including the gods and demi-gods,

			Were to rise up against me as one enemy,

			They could not lead me to the fires of the deepest hell

			And throw me in;

			(31)	But this powerful enemy of the delusions

			In an instant can cast me into that fiery place

			Where even the ashes of Mount Meru

			Would be consumed without a trace.

			(32)	No other type of enemy

			Can remain for as long a time

			As can the enduring foes of my delusions,

			For they have no beginning and no apparent end.

			(33)	If I agree with external enemies and honour them,

			They will eventually bring me benefit and happiness;

			But if I entrust myself to delusions,

			In the future they will bring me only more pain and suffering.

			(34)	So how can I remain in samsara joyfully and without fear

			While I readily reserve a place in my heart

			For this interminable enemy of long duration

			That alone is the cause of increasing all my suffering?

			(35)	How can I ever be happy

			While these guardians of the prison of samsara

			That torture and torment me in the hells and elsewhere

			Dwell like a net of iron in my mind?

			(36)	Out of anger, worldly people who are filled with pride will not sleep

			Until they have destroyed those who cause them even the slightest temporary harm.

			In the same way, I will not abandon my efforts

			Until this inner foe of mine is directly and definitely destroyed.

			(37)	If those who engage in violent battles,

			Strongly wishing to destroy deluded beings who must suffer death anyway,

			Disregard the pain of being wounded by weapons

			And do not withdraw until they have accomplished their aim,

			(38)	Then it goes without saying that, even if I have to endure great hardships,

			From now on I should not be indolent or faint-hearted

			In striving once and for all to destroy this natural foe

			That is the constant source of all my suffering.

			(39)	If scars inflicted by enemies for no great reason

			Are displayed on the body like ornaments,

			Why should I not be prepared to endure hardships

			In striving sincerely to accomplish the great purpose?

			(40)	If fishermen, hunters and farmers,

			Who think only of their own livelihood,

			Endure such sufferings as heat and cold,

			Why can I not forbear hardships for the sake of the happiness of all?

			(41)	If I myself am not free from delusions

			When I promise all living beings

			Abiding in the ten directions throughout space

			That I will liberate them from their delusions,

			(42)	Is it not foolish of me to say such things

			While disregarding my own shortcomings?

			This being so, I must never turn back

			From destroying my own delusions.

			(43)	This will be my main objective:

			Bearing a strong grudge, to do battle with my delusions.

			Although such a grudge appears to be a delusion,

			Because it destroys delusions it is not.

			(44)	It would be better for me to be burned to death

			Or to have my head cut off

			Than to ever allow myself

			To come under the influence of delusions.

			(45)	An ordinary enemy who is expelled from a country

			Will go to another and remain there,

			Only to return when he has regained his strength;

			But the enemy of the delusions is not like that.

			(46)	O delusions, delusions, where will you go

			When banished by the eye of wisdom and expelled from my mind?

			And from where will you return to harm me again?

			But, being weak-minded, I am reduced to making no effort!

			(47)	The delusions are not in the objects, in the sense powers, between them, or elsewhere;

			So from where can they cause harm to all living beings?

			Because they are just like illusions, I should banish fear from my heart and strive to attain wisdom.

			Why bring the sufferings of hell and so forth upon myself for no reason?

			(48)	Therefore, having considered this well,

			I will strive sincerely to practise these precepts as they have been explained.

			If a sick person does not listen to the doctor’s advice,

			How can he expect to be cured?

			This concludes the fourth chapter of Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, entitled ‘Relying upon Conscientiousness’.





Chapter 5: Guarding the Mind with Alertness





		 			A crazy, untamed elephant in this world

			Cannot inflict such harm

			As the sufferings of the deepest hell

			Caused by the rampaging elephant of the mind;





		 			CHAPTER 5

			Guarding the Mind with Alertness

			(1)	Those who wish to make progress in the trainings

			Should be very attentive in guarding their minds,

			For, if they do not practise guarding the mind,

			They will not be able to complete the trainings.

			(2)	A crazy, untamed elephant in this world

			Cannot inflict such harm

			As the sufferings of the deepest hell

			Caused by the rampaging elephant of the mind;

			(3)	But if the elephant of our mind

			Is bound tightly on all sides by the rope of mindfulness,

			All fears will cease to exist

			And all virtues will fall into our hands.

			(4)	Tigers, lions, elephants, bears,

			Snakes, all kinds of enemy,

			Guardians of the beings in hell,

			Evil spirits and cannibals –

			(5)	These will all be bound

			Simply by binding the mind,

			And will all be subdued

			Simply by subduing the mind.

			(6)	Buddha, the Able One, says,

			‘Thus, all fears

			And all infinite sufferings

			Arise from the mind.’

			(7)	Who purposely creates the weapons

			That harm the beings in the hells?

			Who creates the blazing iron ground?

			From where do the tempting hallucinations arise?

			(8)	The Able One says that all such things

			Come only from evil minds.

			Thus, there is nothing to fear within the three worlds

			That has not come from the mind.

			(9)	If completing the perfection of giving

			Were eliminating the poverty of living beings,

			Since hungry beings still exist,

			How could the previous Buddhas have completed that perfection?

			(10)	The completion of the perfection of giving is said to be

			The thought wishing to give everything to all living beings,

			Together with the merit that results from that giving;

			Therefore, it depends only on mind.

			(11)	The killing of fish and other creatures

			Has not been eradicated anywhere,

			For completing the perfection of moral discipline is said to be

			Attaining a mind that has abandoned non-virtue.

			(12)	It is not possible to subdue unruly beings

			Who are as extensive as space;

			But simply destroying the mind of anger

			Is the same as overcoming all these foes.

			(13)	Where is there enough leather

			To cover the surface of the Earth?

			But just having leather on the soles of one’s feet

			Is the same as covering the whole Earth.

			(14)	In the same way, it is not possible

			To control all external events;

			But, if I simply control my mind,

			What need is there to control other things?

			(15)	Rebirth as a first form realm god and so on, the highest level of mundane happiness,

			Which results from the mental action of clear concentration of the actual absorption* of the form or formless realms,

			Does not come from actions of body or speech

			But from actions of mind.

			* The two absorptions – the absorption of close preparation and the actual absorption – can be understood from the book Ocean of Nectar.

			(16)	Buddha, the All Knowing One, has said

			That reciting mantras and prayers, and enduring spiritual hardships,

			Even for a long time,

			Are to no avail if the mind is distracted elsewhere.

			(17)	Even those who wish to find happiness and avoid suffering

			Will wander without meaning or purpose

			If they do not practise training the mind,

			The supreme and principal Dharma.

			(18)	Therefore, I will guard my mind well

			And protect it from what is inappropriate.

			Without the discipline of guarding the mind,

			What is the use of many other disciplines?

			(19)	Just as I would be careful of a wound

			When in a jostling and unruly crowd,

			So should I always guard the wound of my mind

			When among those who might provoke delusions.

			(20)	If I am careful of a physical wound

			Out of fear of even the slightest pain,

			Why do I not protect the wound of my mind

			Out of fear of being crushed by the mountains of hell?

			(21)	If I always practise in this way,

			Then, whether I am among harmful beings

			Or with people I find attractive,

			Neither my steadfastness nor my vows will decline.

			(22)	I can accept losing my wealth and reputation,

			Or even my livelihood or my body,

			And I can even accept my other virtues degenerating;

			But I can never allow my practice of guarding the mind to decline.

			(23)	With my palms pressed together,

			I beseech those who wish to guard their minds:

			Always put effort into guarding

			Both mindfulness and alertness.

			(24)	Just as people who are troubled by sickness

			Have no strength for any kind of physical work,

			So those whose minds are disturbed by confusion

			Have no strength for any kind of virtuous action.

			(25)	Moreover, for those whose minds lack alertness,

			The wisdoms from listening, contemplating and meditating

			Will not be retained by their memory

			Any more than water will remain in a leaky pot.

			(26)	Even those who have much learning and faith

			And who have sincerely applied great effort

			Will become defiled by moral downfalls

			Through the fault of lacking alertness.

			(27)	If I lack alertness, the thieves of the delusions

			Will cause my mindfulness to degenerate,

			And then steal even the merit I have so diligently gathered

			So that I shall fall into the lower realms.

			(28)	These legions of thieves of the delusions

			Are just waiting for an opportunity

			And, when one arises, they will steal my wealth of virtue

			And destroy any chance of a fortunate rebirth.

			(29)	Therefore, I will not allow my mindfulness

			To stray from the doorway of my mind;

			And, if I notice it is about to leave,

			I will restore it by recalling the sufferings of the lower realms.

			(30)	Fortunate ones who follow the instructions they receive,

			Maintain respect for their Spiritual Guide

			And generate fear of the lower realms

			Can easily develop and maintain mindfulness.

			(31)	‘I am always in the presence

			Of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas

			Who, with their omniscient gaze,

			See everything without obstruction.’

			(32)	By thinking in this way, we can maintain

			Sense of shame, respect and fear,

			And repeatedly bring to mind

			The good qualities of the Buddhas.

			(33)	When mindfulness is maintained

			With the purpose of guarding the mind,

			Alertness will naturally arise

			And even that which was lost will return.

			(34)	First, I should check to see how my mind is;

			And, if I see it is polluted with negativity,

			I should remain unmoving,

			With a mind as impassive as wood.

			(35)	I should never look around

			Out of distraction or for no purpose,

			But always, with a resolute mind,

			Be mindful of my gaze.

			(36)	From time to time, to relax my gaze,

			I should look around without distraction;

			And if someone appears in my field of vision,

			I should acknowledge them and greet them.

			(37)	To avoid dangers or accidents on the path,

			I should occasionally look in all directions,

			And prevent my mind from becoming distracted

			By relying upon conscientiousness.

			(38)	I should practise in the same way

			Whenever I go or return.

			Understanding the need to behave like this,

			I should apply this practice in all situations.

			(39)	I should prepare for any activity by thinking,

			‘My body and mind must remain correctly composed’;

			And from time to time check carefully to see

			What I am actually doing and thinking.

			(40)	With all my effort, I should regularly check

			That the unsubdued elephant of my mind

			Has not broken free but remains bound

			To the great pillar of thinking about Dharma.

			(41)	Striving for concentration by whatever means,

			I should not let my mind wander for even a moment

			But closely examine it by asking,

			‘How is my mind behaving?’

			(42)	It is said there are times, when practising giving, that one can be judicious

			In applying some of the finer points of moral discipline.

			When there is danger or a special celebration,

			One can perform actions suitable for that occasion.

			(43)	I should undertake what I intend and have decided to do,

			Without being distracted by other things;

			And, with my thoughts focused on that practice,

			For now, I should do just that.

			(44)	In this way, I shall do everything well;

			Otherwise, I shall accomplish neither one thing nor the other.

			With this skilful practice, there can be no increase

			In secondary delusions, such as non-alertness.

			(45)	Whenever I listen to any sort of talk,

			Whether pleasant or unpleasant,

			Or observe attractive or unattractive people,

			I should prevent attachment or hatred towards them.

			(46)	If for no reason I begin to perform actions

			That cause damage to the environment,

			I should recall Buddha’s advice

			And, out of respect, stop straightaway.

			(47)	Whenever I wish to move my body

			Or to utter any words,

			I should first examine my mind

			And then steadfastly act in an appropriate way.

			(48)	Whenever there arises in my mind

			The desire to become attached or angry,

			I should not do or say anything

			But remain as impassive as wood.

			(49)	Whenever I am pretentious, mocking,

			Arrogant or self-important;

			Whenever I develop the intention to speak of others’ faults,

			Or think of profiteering or deceiving;

			(50)	Or whenever I start to solicit praise,

			Deprecate others,

			Or use harmful or divisive speech,

			I should remain as impassive as wood.

			(51)	Whenever I desire wealth, honour or fame,

			Or the attentions of a circle of admirers;

			Or whenever my mind wishes for veneration,

			I should remain as impassive as wood.

			(52)	If I develop a mind wishing to say something,

			While neglecting others’ welfare

			And pursuing only my own,

			I should remain as impassive as wood.

			(53)	If I am ever impatient with suffering, or lazy and fearful of virtue;

			If I am about to speak recklessly or disparagingly;

			Or if attachment to my circle of acquaintances arises,

			I should remain as impassive as wood.

			(54)	Thus, having checked thoroughly for delusions

			And minds that are drawn to meaningless things,

			Courageous practitioners should hold their mind steady

			Through applying the appropriate opponents.

			(55)	With complete certainty, strong faith,

			Steadfastness, respect, politeness,

			Sense of shame, fearfulness, and inner peace,

			I should strive to bring joy to others.

			(56)	I should not become disheartened by the behaviour of others –

			The childish, who are in disharmony with one another –

			But understand how this behaviour arises through the force of delusions

			And be compassionate towards them.

			(57)	I should engage only in virtuous actions

			To benefit living beings, with no thought for myself;

			And I should do so with the understanding that I am like an illusion

			That does not exist from its own side.

			(58)	Contemplating again and again

			That I have attained this special freedom after a very long time,

			I should hold as unmoveable as Mount Meru

			The intention to accomplish the real meaning of a human life.

			(59)	If, mind, you are concerned

			About death taking this body from you

			And its being burned or buried beneath the ground,

			Why do you cherish it so now?

			(60)	Why, mind, do you hold this body as ‘mine’

			And grasp it with such affection?

			It is only borrowed from others

			And will soon be taken from you.

			(61)	Why, confused mind,

			Do you not hold onto a clean wooden form?

			What is the use of grasping at this putrid machine

			That is only a collection of impurities?

			(62)	Begin by mentally separating

			The layers of skin from the flesh.

			Then, with the blade of wisdom,

			Cut the flesh away from the bones.

			(63)	Break open even the bones

			And look right down to the marrow.

			Make your own investigation –

			‘Where is its essence?’

			(64)	If you do not find any essence there

			Even when you search with such effort,

			Why, mind, do you still grasp this body

			With so much attachment?

			(65)	It is so impure, it is not even fit to eat,

			Its blood is not fit to drink

			And its intestines are not fit to suck;

			So what use is this body to you?

			(66)	It is suitable to protect it and care for it

			Only for attaining spiritual goals –

			This body of a human being

			Should be used just for practising Dharma.

			(67)	But if you guard it for other purposes,

			What will you be able to do

			When the merciless Lord of Death seizes it

			And reduces it to a pile of ashes?

			(68)	A servant is not rewarded with clothes and the like

			If he does no work;

			So why do you insist on nourishing this collection of flesh and bone

			When, even when fed, its loyalties lie elsewhere?

			(69)	In exchange for paying my body its wages,

			I will employ it to create virtue for myself and others;

			But I should not grasp it as ‘mine’

			Because such grasping is a form of ignorance.

			(70)	I will regard my body as a boat –

			A basis for coming and going –

			And to accomplish the welfare of all living beings

			I will transform my body into an enlightened wishfulfilling jewel.

			(71)	While I have control,

			I should always display a smiling face

			And, forsaking frowns and angry looks,

			Be friendly and honest towards others.

			(72)	I should not behave in ways that disturb others,

			Such as moving furniture noisily

			Or opening and closing doors loudly,

			But always delight in humility.

			(73)	Just as a stork, a cat or a thief

			Accomplish their aims with skill and patience,

			So should I accomplish my spiritual goal

			Of attaining the state of enlightenment.

			(74)	When others offer wise advice or admonishment

			That, though unsolicited, is nevertheless beneficial,

			I should accept it graciously and with respect,

			And always be willing to learn from it.

			(75)	To anyone who speaks the truth,

			I should say, ‘You have spoken well’;

			And whenever I see others perform meritorious actions,

			I should offer praise and develop genuine joy.

			(76)	I should discreetly describe others’ good qualities

			And pass on any I hear about,

			But, should my own good qualities be mentioned,

			I should simply acknowledge any I might have, without pride.

			(77)	I should perform all actions for others’ happiness.

			This good quality is precious and rare,

			And through it I shall enjoy the pure happiness and joy

			That arises from actions that benefit others.

			(78)	If I do this, I shall suffer no loss in this life

			And in future lives I shall experience great happiness;

			But, if I do the opposite,

			I shall experience misery and pain in life after life.

			(79)	I should speak truthfully, coherently and to the point,

			Making my meaning clear in a pleasant manner.

			I should speak gently and in moderation,

			Without a selfish motivation.

			(80)	Whenever I see other beings,

			I should think, ‘I can attain enlightenment

			In dependence upon these living beings!’

			And cherish them sincerely.

			(81)	With either a cultivated motivation

			Or one that arises spontaneously,

			I should always sow seeds of great virtue

			In the fields of holy beings and living beings.

			(82)	I should perform all my Dharma activities

			With skill, clear understanding and strong faith,

			So that others will increase their wisdom

			And experience immeasurable benefit.

			(83)	Although in general the perfections of giving and so forth

			Are progressively higher than those that precede them,

			I should not forsake great virtues for the sake of small ones.

			Principally, I should consider the benefit to others.

			(84)	Buddha, the compassionate Far-Seeing One,

			Allows Bodhisattvas to perform certain actions that are otherwise proscribed.

			Understanding this well, I should always put effort

			Into my practice of the Bodhisattva’s way of life.

			(85)	I should share my food with animals,

			People who are hungry and practitioners,

			And eat merely what I need.

			Ordained people can give everything except their three robes.

			(86)	Because I use this body to practise bodhichitta,

			I should not harm it for the sake of temporary benefits,

			But care for it so that I may fulfil my bodhichitta wish,

			So that eventually all living beings’ wishes will be fulfilled.

			(87)	Those who lack pure compassion and wisdom

			Should not actually give away their body

			But, instead, devote it to accomplishing

			The great purpose of this and future lives.

			(88)	I should listen to Dharma

			With respect and a good heart,

			Recognizing it as the supreme medicine

			For curing the pains of anger and attachment.

			(89)	I should teach the vast and profound Dharma with a pure intention,

			Free from any wish to acquire wealth or reputation;

			And I should always maintain a pure motivation of bodhichitta

			And make great effort to put Dharma into practice.

			(90)	I should explain Dharma to release those who are listening

			From samsara, the cycle of suffering,

			And to lead them to the ultimate goal –

			The attainment of full enlightenment.

			(91)	I should keep places clean and not throw litter

			But dispose of it correctly.

			Moreover, I should not defile

			Water or land used by others.

			(92)	I should not eat with my mouth full,

			Noisily or with my mouth open.

			I should not sit with my legs outstretched,

			Nor rub my hands together meaninglessly.

			(93)	I should not sit alone with another’s partner

			In a vehicle, on a bed or in the same room.

			I should observe and enquire about what offends people

			And then avoid such actions.

			(94)	To show someone the way,

			I should not point with just one finger

			But respectfully use my right hand

			With all the fingers extended.

			(95)	I should not wave my arms around in an uncontrolled manner,

			But communicate with slight movements

			And appropriate gestures;

			Otherwise, I shall lose my composure.

			(96)	To sleep, I should lie in the appropriate position –

			Just as Protector Buddha lay when he entered parinirvana –

			And before falling asleep, with alertness,

			Make a definite decision to rise quickly.

			(97)	Within the limitless practices

			Taught as the Bodhisattva’s way of life,

			I should start by emphasizing

			These practices that train the mind.

			(98)	I should practise the Sutra of the Three Heaps

			Three times each day and three times each night,

			And, with reliance on the Three Jewels and bodhichitta,

			Purify non-virtues and downfalls.

			(99)	Whatever I do in any situation,

			Whether for myself or for the benefit of others,

			I should strive to practise

			Whatever training has been taught for that occasion.

			(100)	For a Bodhisattva, there is no teaching of Buddha

			That he or she should not practise.

			If I become skilled in this way of life,

			Nothing I do will lack merit.

			(101)	Whether directly or indirectly,

			I should never do anything that is not for the sake of living beings.

			I should dedicate everything

			Solely to the enlightenment of all living beings.

			(102)	Never, even at the cost of my life,

			Should I abandon my Spiritual Guide,

			Who is skilled in the meaning of the Mahayana

			And a supreme practitioner of the Bodhisattva trainings.

			(103)	I should train in relying upon the Spiritual Guide

			In the manner explained in the Biography of Shri Sambhava.

			I can understand this and other advice given by Buddha

			From studying the Mahayana Sutras.

			(104)	I should read these Sutras

			Because they reveal the Bodhisattva trainings.

			First, it is important to study

			Akashagarbha Sutra.

			(105)	Also, it is important to read again and again

			The Compendium of Trainings

			Because it extensively reveals

			What is to be practised all the time.

			(106)	Moreover, sometimes one should read

			The Condensed Compendium of Sutras;

			And with great effort, one should also study

			The same two titles by Superior Nagarjuna.

			(107)	In summary, since I generated engaging bodhichitta and took the Bodhisattva vow,

			I should practise all the precepts mentioned above,

			So that others’ pure view, mind of faith and good intention

			Will be increased by my example.

			(108)	The defining characteristic of guarding alertness

			Is to examine again and again

			The state of our body, speech and mind,

			And to understand whether our actions are correct or not.

			(109)	We need to put Buddha’s teachings, the Dharma, into practice

			Because nothing can be accomplished just by reading words.

			A sick man will never be cured of his illness

			Through merely reading medical instructions!

			This concludes the fifth chapter of Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, entitled ‘Guarding the Mind with Alertness’.





Chapter 6: Relying upon Patience





		 			If, for example, a house caught fire

			And there was a danger of the fire spreading to an adjacent house,

			It would be advisable to remove anything, such as dry grass,

			That might enable the fire to spread.





		 			CHAPTER 6

			Relying upon Patience

			(1)	All the virtuous deeds and merit,

			Such as giving and making offerings,

			That we have accumulated over thousands of aeons

			Can be destroyed by just one moment of anger.

			(2)	There is no evil greater than anger,

			And no virtue greater than patience.

			Therefore, I should strive in various ways

			To become familiar with the practice of patience.

			(3)	If I harbour painful thoughts of anger,

			I shall not experience mental peace,

			I shall find no joy or happiness,

			And I shall be unsettled and unable to sleep.

			(4)	Overcome by a fit of anger,

			I might even kill a benefactor

			Upon whose kindness I depend

			For my wealth or reputation.

			(5)	Anger causes friends and relatives to grow weary of me

			And, even if I try to attract them with generosity, they will not trust me.

			In short, there is no one

			Who can live happily with anger.

			(6)	Although the enemy of anger

			Creates sufferings such as these,

			Whoever works hard to overcome it

			Will find only happiness in this and future lives.

			(7)	Through having to do what I do not want to do

			Or being prevented from doing what I want to do,

			I develop mental unhappiness, which becomes the fuel

			That causes anger to grow and destroy me.

			(8)	Therefore, I should never allow this fuel of mental unhappiness

			That causes anger to grow within my mind,

			For this enemy of anger has no function

			Other than to harm me.

			(9)	I will not allow anything that happens to me

			To disturb my mental peace.

			If I become unhappy, I shall be unable to fulfil my spiritual wishes

			And my practice of virtue will decline.

			(10)	If something can be remedied

			Why be unhappy about it?

			And if there is no remedy for it,

			There is still no point in being unhappy.

			(11)	People do not want suffering, criticism,

			Harsh words or anything unpleasant

			For themselves or for their friends;

			But for their enemies it is the opposite!

			(12)	In samsara, the causes of happiness rarely occur,

			Whereas the causes of suffering are innumerable.

			Without suffering, there would be no renunciation;

			Therefore, mind, you should remain firm.

			(13)	If some ascetics and the people of Karnapa

			Can endure the pain of burns and cuts for no great purpose,

			Why can I not endure hardships

			For the sake of liberating everyone from their suffering?

			(14)	There is nothing that is not easy to accomplish

			If we develop familiarity with it;

			So first I should learn to forbear small sufferings

			And then gradually endure greater ones.

			(15)	This can be seen in those who voluntarily endure minor sufferings,

			Such as animal or insect bites,

			Feelings of hunger or thirst,

			Or irritations of the skin.

			(16)	I should not become impatient

			With heat and cold, wind and rain,

			Or sickness, confinement or beatings;

			For, if I do, the pain will only increase.

			(17)	Some, when they see their own blood,

			Become even stronger and braver;

			While for others, just seeing someone else’s blood

			Causes them to become weak and even to faint!

			(18)	Both these reactions depend on the mind –

			Whether it is strong or it is weak –

			So I should disregard any harm that befalls me

			And not allow myself to be affected by suffering.

			(19)	Whenever I experience hardship,

			I should fight my delusions, such as anger;

			And whenever I experience physical pain,

			I should use wisdom to maintain a pure and peaceful mind.

			(20)	Those who disregard all suffering

			To destroy the foes of anger and so forth

			Are the true conquerors worthy of the name ‘hero’;

			Other so-called heroes merely slay corpses.

			(21)	Moreover, suffering has many good qualities.

			Through experiencing it, we can dispel pride,

			Develop compassion for those trapped in samsara,

			Abandon non-virtue and delight in virtue.

			(22)	I do not become angry when the cause of suffering

			Is something inanimate, such as sickness;

			So why become angry with animate causes,

			For they too are all controlled by other conditions?

			(23)	Although it is not wished for in the least,

			Sickness nevertheless occurs.

			In the same way, even though they are not wanted,

			Delusions such as anger forcibly arise.

			(24)	People do not think, ‘I will get angry’,

			They just get angry;

			And anger does not think, ‘I will arise’,

			It just arises.

			(25)	All the shortcomings there are,

			And all the various non-virtues,

			Arise through the force of other conditions –

			They do not govern themselves.

			(26)	The assembled conditions have no thought

			To produce a suffering result;

			Nor does the resultant suffering think,

			‘I was produced from conditions.’

			(27)	Neither that which is asserted as the ‘independent creator of all’

			Nor that which is asserted as the ‘independent permanent self’

			Can come into being through intentionally thinking,

			‘Now I will arise.’

			(28)	If the independent creator itself is not produced,

			Then how can it produce anything?

			If the self were permanent, then it would follow

			That experiences cannot be changed from unpleasant to pleasant.

			(29)	Clearly, if the self were permanent,

			Then, just like space, it could not perform any actions;

			And, even if it could meet with other conditions,

			It would still be unable to do anything.

			(30)	Since, even when acted upon, it would remain as it was,

			What effect could an action have on it?

			If you say that something else affects the self,

			What relationship could the self have with that?

			(31)	Thus, all effects arise from other conditions,

			Which in turn depend upon previous conditions.

			Therefore, all things are like illusions – they are not independent.

			If we realize this, we shall not become angry with anything.

			(32)	‘If all things were like illusions, who would restrain what?

			Surely, any restraint would be inappropriate.’

			On the contrary, it is precisely because things lack inherent existence

			That it is possible to assert that the continuum of suffering can be cut.

			(33)	Thus, whenever an enemy, or even a friend,

			Commits an inappropriate action,

			Such behaviour arises from other conditions.

			Realizing this, I should remain with a happy mind.

			(34)	If things occurred independently, out of choice,

			Then, since no one wishes to suffer,

			How would suffering ever arise

			For any living being?

			(35)	Some misguided people inflict harm upon themselves

			By lying on thorns and the like;

			While others, obsessed with finding a partner,

			Deprive themselves of food.

			(36)	Then there are those who inflict harm on themselves

			Through non-meritorious actions,

			Such as hanging themselves, leaping from cliffs,

			Swallowing poison or eating bad food.

			(37)	Although they cherish themselves more than anything else,

			If, under the influence of delusions, people are capable even of killing themselves,

			Why should I be surprised when they inflict harm

			On other living beings such as me?

			(38)	When those who, under the influence of delusions,

			Set out to harm or even to kill me,

			If I cannot develop compassion for them,

			At the very least I should refrain from getting angry.

			(39)	If it were the very nature of a childish person

			To inflict harm on others,

			It would be no more reasonable to get angry with him

			Than it would be to resent fire for burning us.

			(40)	On the other hand, if that harmfulness were a temporary fault

			And that person were otherwise good-natured,

			It would be just as unreasonable to get angry with him

			As it would be to resent space for filling with smoke.

			(41)	If someone were to harm us with a stick or other weapon,

			We would normally become angry with the person;

			But, since his intent is governed by anger,

			It is really towards that anger that we should direct our wrath.

			(42)	In such situations, we should think,

			‘In the past, I harmed others in a similar manner.

			Therefore, it is fitting that I, who caused harm to others,

			Should now be experiencing such harm myself.’

			(43)	The physical suffering I experience

			Is caused by both the stick and my body;

			But, since the stick comes from my assailant and the body from me,

			With which of these should I get angry?

			(44)	Blinded by craving and ignorance,

			I have taken this form, the basis of human suffering,

			Which can hardly bear to be touched;

			So with whom should I get angry when it is hurt?

			(45)	Although we childish beings have no wish for suffering,

			We are greatly attached to its causes.

			Thus, the harm we receive is entirely our fault;

			What reason is there to blame it on others?

			(46)	Just as with the guardians of hell,

			The forest of razor-sharp leaves and so forth,

			My sufferings in this life result from my actions –

			So with whom should I be angry?

			(47)	Although those who harm me

			Are provoked into doing so by my own karma,

			It is they who will take rebirth in hell as a result;

			So, is it not I who harm them?

			(48)	By depending upon them as my objects of patience,

			I can purify many non-virtues;

			But by depending upon me as their object of anger,

			They will fall for a long time into hellish states of suffering.

			(49)	Thus, since it is I who inflict harm on them

			And they who benefit me,

			Why, unruly mind, do you distort things so

			By becoming angry with them?

			(50)	If I maintain this positive view,

			I shall not create the cause to be reborn in hell;

			But, although I protect myself through the practice of patience,

			The same effect will not ripen on others.

			(51)	‘Then would it not be better to return their harm?’

			No! Retaliation would not protect them;

			It would just cause my Bodhisattva vow to degenerate

			And destroy my practice of patience.

			(52)	Since my mind is not a bodily form,

			There is no one who can destroy it;

			But, because I am strongly attached to my body,

			I feel hurt when it is suffering.

			(53)	Contempt, harsh words

			And unpleasant speech

			Do not harm the body;

			So why, mind, do you become so angry?

			(54)	‘Such slanderous words may cause others to dislike you.’

			Their dislike will not cause me any harm

			In this or future lives;

			So why should I not want it?

			(55)	‘If people dislike you, that might prevent you

			From acquiring wealth or status.’

			But I shall lose all my worldly acquisitions when I die –

			The only thing to remain will be the non-virtue I create.

			(56)	It would be better for me to die today

			Than to live a long life filled with non-virtue;

			And, even if I have a long life,

			I shall still have to face the suffering of death.

			(57)	If one person were to awake from a dream

			In which he had experienced a hundred years of happiness,

			And another were to awake from a dream

			In which he had experienced but a brief moment of happiness,

			(58)	Once awake, the situation would be the same for both

			Because neither could ever return to that happiness.

			In the same way, whether our life is long or short,

			At the time of death everything ends just the same.

			(59)	Even if I live happily for a long time

			And acquire great wealth and possessions,

			I shall still have to leave this life empty-handed and naked,

			As if I had been robbed by a thief.

			(60)	‘Even so, acquiring wealth will support your life

			So that you can purify non-virtue and accumulate merit.’

			But if in acquiring that wealth I generate non-virtues such as anger,

			It will be my non-virtue that increases and my merit that declines.

			(61)	What is the point of a life

			In which we commit only non-virtue?

			Non-virtues are the main cause of our suffering,

			And suffering is the main object to be abandoned!

			(62)	‘At least you should retaliate when people speak ill of you

			And cause others to lose their faith in you.’

			In that case, why do I not get angry

			When people speak ill of others?

			(63)	If, mind, you can forbear such loss of faith

			When it is related to others,

			Why are you not patient when others speak ill of you,

			For that is related to the arising of delusions?

			(64)	Even if someone were to insult or destroy the Dharma,

			The holy images or the stupas,

			It would still not be appropriate to get angry with them,

			For how could the Three Jewels ever be harmed?

			(65)	We should also prevent anger arising towards anyone

			Who might harm our Spiritual Guide, our friends or our relatives

			By seeing that such harm also occurs in dependence upon conditions

			In the way that was just explained.

			(66)	Embodied beings are harmed

			By both animate and inanimate objects;

			So why become angry only with animate ones?

			We should be patient with both types of harm.

			(67)	If one person causes harm out of ignorance

			And another gets angry with him, also out of ignorance,

			Which person is at fault

			And which one is not?

			(68)	Out of ignorance, previously I committed actions

			That now result in others causing me harm.

			Thus, all the harm I receive is related to my own actions,

			So why get angry with others?

			(69)	Seeing this to be the case,

			I should practise what is meritorious,

			Impelled by the wish that all living beings

			Will develop love for one another.

			(70)	If, for example, a house caught fire

			And there was a danger of the fire spreading to an adjacent house,

			It would be advisable to remove anything, such as dry grass,

			That might enable the fire to spread.

			(71)	In the same way, when those to whom I cling are harmed,

			My attachment to them enables the fire of anger to spread to me.

			Fearing that this will consume all my merit,

			I should definitely abandon such attachment.

			(72)	How fortunate is a person condemned to death

			Who is spared with having just his hand cut off;

			And how fortunate are we if, instead of the agonies of hell,

			We have to experience only the sufferings of the human realm.

			(73)	If we cannot bear the relatively slight suffering

			That we have to experience now,

			Why do we not refrain from anger,

			Which causes the far greater sufferings of hell?

			(74)	In the past, because of my attachment to non-virtuous actions,

			I have endured aeons of torment in the hells and elsewhere,

			And yet none of that has brought any benefit

			Either to myself or to others;

			(75)	But now, through enduring comparatively little discomfort,

			I can accomplish the greatest purpose of all –

			To free all living beings from their suffering –

			So I should feel only joy at having to endure such hardships.

			(76)	If someone else develops a mind of joy

			Through praising another’s good qualities,

			Why, mind, do you not praise him too

			And experience the same kind of joy?

			(77)	I should always rejoice in others’ happiness and virtue.

			This joy causes my virtues to increase.

			Moreover, it is the cause of delighting the holy beings

			And the supreme method for benefiting others.

			(78)	Those who are not concerned with others’ happiness

			And do not want them to be happy,

			Are like someone who stops paying wages to those who work for him,

			Who then experiences many problems.

			(79)	When my own good qualities are praised,

			I want others to rejoice in me;

			So why, when others’ good qualities are praised,

			Should I not want to rejoice in them?

			(80)	Having generated the bodhichitta motivation

			Wishing for all living beings to be happy,

			Why on earth do we not rejoice

			When others find some happiness for themselves?

			(81)	If I really wish for living beings to become Buddhas,

			Who are worshipped throughout all worlds,

			Why do I dislike it so

			When others receive a little mundane respect now?

			(82)	If someone I was looking after

			And providing for in different ways

			Were to find his own source of livelihood,

			Surely I would be happy, not upset.

			(83)	If I begrudge living beings even this,

			How can I wish for them to attain enlightenment?

			Where is the bodhichitta in one who is not happy

			When others receive something good?

			(84)	People become angry when someone benefits their enemy,

			But, whether their enemy receives benefit or not,

			It is the enemy’s own anger that urges him to attack;

			So it is that anger which is to blame, not the benefactor.

			(85)	Why, by getting angry, do we throw away our merit,

			The faith others have in us, and our other good qualities?

			Would it not be better to get angry with anger itself,

			For it brings no benefit to us or to others?

			(86)	It is bad enough that you, mind, have no remorse

			For the non-virtues you have committed;

			But why do you compound it

			By being jealous with those who practise virtue?

			(87)	The thought that wishes for our enemy to suffer

			Harms only us, through creating non-virtue;

			Understanding this, we should not develop harmful thoughts

			Towards anyone, including our enemies.

			(88)	And even if your enemy did suffer as you wish,

			How would that benefit you?

			If you say, ‘Well, at least it would give me some satisfaction’,

			How can there be a mind lower than that?

			(89)	Such thoughts are like unbearably sharp hooks

			Cast by the fishermen of the delusions, such as anger.

			Once caught on them, we shall definitely be boiled alive

			In the terrifying cauldrons of the guardians of hell.

			(90)	Praise, fame and good reputation

			Will not increase my merit or extend my life,

			Nor will they give me strength, freedom from illness,

			Or any form of physical pleasure.

			(91)	Transient pleasures, such as drinking and playing meaningless games,

			Are deceptive.

			If I understand the real meaning of a human life,

			Such things will have no value for me.

			(92)	For the sake of fame and reputation,

			People give away their wealth and even sacrifice their lives;

			But what good can a few dry words do when we die?

			To whom can they bring any pleasure?

			(93)	When people lose their reputation,

			They become despondent, like a child

			Who cries when the sandcastle he has built

			Is washed away by the tide.

			(94)	A few short-lived, inanimate sounds

			Can have no intention to praise me.

			‘But they are a source of pleasure for the one who praises you;

			So you should be happy too.’

			(95)	Whether someone praises me or others,

			How shall I benefit from their pleasure?

			Since it is entirely in their mind,

			I shall not receive any part of it.

			(96)	‘But you should be happy because he is happy.’

			Then I should feel the same way about everyone –

			In which case I should also be happy

			When something pleases my enemy!

			(97)	Seeking happiness from praise

			Given by friends and others

			Is entirely inappropriate –

			It is completely childish behaviour.

			(98)	Praise and so forth distract me from virtue,

			Weaken my disillusionment with samsara,

			Cause me to envy others’ good qualities,

			And undermine everything that is beneficial.

			(99)	Therefore, those who conspire

			To prevent me from being praised

			Are really acting to prevent me

			From falling into the lower realms!

			(100)	I, who seek liberation, have no need for wealth or a good reputation

			For they only keep me bound in samsara;

			So why should I get angry

			With those who free me from this bondage?

			(101)	Those who cause me suffering

			Are like Buddhas bestowing their blessings.

			Since they lead me to liberating paths,

			Why should I get angry with them?

			(102)	‘Don’t they obstruct your virtuous practice?’

			No! There is no virtuous practice greater than patience;

			Therefore, I will never get angry

			With those who cause me suffering.

			(103)	If, because of my own shortcomings,

			I do not practise patience with my enemy,

			It is not he, but I, who prevent me from practising patience,

			The cause of accumulating merit.

			(104)	My enemy is the cause of my accumulating the merit of patience

			Because without him there is no patience to practise,

			Whereas with him there is.

			So how does he obstruct my virtuous practice?

			(105)	A beggar is not an obstacle

			To people practising giving

			Any more than an Abbot is an obstacle

			To those wishing to ordain.

			(106)	Indeed, there are many beggars in this world,

			But people who harm me are extremely rare.

			In fact, if I had not inflicted harm on others in the past,

			There would be no one to inflict harm on me now!

			(107)	Just as if some treasure were suddenly to appear in my house

			Without my making any effort to obtain it,

			I should be delighted to have found an enemy

			Who can help me practise the conduct that leads to enlightenment.

			(108)	Along with myself, my enemy is the cause of my practising patience.

			Therefore, I should first dedicate

			Whatever fruits arise from this practice

			To the person who was a cause of it.

			(109)	‘But your enemy has no intention to help you practise patience,

			So why should you venerate him?’

			Then why venerate the holy Dharma

			As a way of practising virtue?

			(110)	‘Surely you should not venerate an enemy

			Who harbours the intention to cause you harm.’

			But if everyone was like a doctor striving to help me,

			When would I ever practise patience?

			(111)	Thus, because the practice of patience occurs

			In dependence upon those with hateful minds,

			Such people should be venerated just like the holy Dharma

			Because they are causes of the practice of patience.

			(112)	Buddha says that the field of living beings

			Is like the field of enlightened beings,

			For there are many practitioners who, through pleasing living beings,

			Have attained the state of perfection, Buddhahood.

			(113)	Since living beings and enlightened beings are alike

			In that the qualities of a Buddha arise in dependence upon them,

			Why do we not show the same respect to living beings

			As we do to the enlightened beings?

			(114)	They are not equal with regard to their realizations;

			But, because living beings have the good quality

			Of helping to produce the same result, Buddhahood,

			They are equal in the sense of also being a field of merit.

			(115)	Whatever merit there is in venerating one with limitless love

			Is due to the greatness of all living beings,

			And whatever merit there is in having faith in the Buddhas

			Is due to the greatness of the Buddhas.

			(116)	Thus, they are said to be equal because being respectful to both

			Leads to the attainment of the state of Buddhahood;

			But because living beings do not possess limitless good qualities,

			They are not actually equal to Buddhas.

			(117)	The unique qualities of a Buddha are so extensive

			That any being in whom even a small fraction of them appears

			Is worthy of veneration that would not be adequately expressed

			Even by offering them everything in the three worlds.

			(118)	Therefore, because they share in giving rise

			To the supreme state of Buddhahood,

			At least from this point of view

			It is suitable to venerate living beings.

			(119)	Moreover, besides pleasing living beings,

			What other way is there for us to repay

			Those supreme, unchanging friends

			Who bestow immeasurable benefit?

			(120)	By benefiting these living beings, I can repay Buddha,

			Who many times gave up his life and entered the deepest hell for their sake.

			Therefore, even if they inflict great harm on me,

			I will always treat them respectfully and with a good heart.

			(121)	If Buddhas, who are far superior to me,

			Disregard their own bodies for the sake of living beings,

			Why do I act out of foolish pride

			And not behave as if I were a servant of others?

			(122)	Buddhas are delighted when living beings are happy

			And displeased when they are harmed;

			So it follows that, when I please or harm living beings,

			It is the same as pleasing or harming all the Buddhas.

			(123)	If we harm a child,

			There is no way to please its mother.

			In the same way, if we harm any living being,

			There is no way to please the compassionate Buddhas.

			(124)	Therefore, since I have caused harm to living beings,

			Which has displeased the compassionate Buddhas,

			Today I confess individually all these non-virtues –

			Please, O Compassionate Ones, forgive me for offending you so.

			(125)	From now on, to delight the Tathagatas,

			I will definitely become like a servant to all living beings.

			Even if people kick me and humiliate me,

			I will please the Buddhas by not retaliating.

			(126)	There is no doubt that the compassionate Buddhas

			Have completed exchanging self with all living beings.

			Thus, the nature of living beings is the very nature of the Buddhas,

			So we should afford them the same respect.

			(127)	Practising in this way pleases all the Buddhas,

			Is a perfect method for accumulating good fortune,

			And gives me the ability to dispel the sufferings of the world.

			Therefore, I should always practise the three types of patience.

			(128)	If, for example, a king’s minister

			Were to cause harm to many people,

			Far-sighted people would not retaliate

			Even if they were able to do so

			(129)	Because they would see that he was not alone

			But was supported by the might of the king.

			In the same way, we should not retaliate

			To those who cause us a little harm,

			(130)	Because they are supported by the compassionate Buddhas –

			And by the guardians of hell!

			Therefore, we should be like the subjects of a powerful king

			And try to please other living beings.

			(131)	Even if such a king were to get angry,

			He would not be able to subject me to the sufferings of hell,

			Which is what I shall experience

			If I harm other beings.

			(132)	And, no matter how benevolent that king might be,

			He could not bestow upon me the attainment of Buddhahood,

			Which is what I shall experience

			If I please other beings.

			(133)	Why can I not see that my eventual attainment of Buddhahood,

			And my success, good reputation

			And prosperity in this life,

			All come from pleasing other living beings?

			(134)	Even while I remain in samsara,

			Through patience I shall attain beautiful forms,

			Good health, reputation, very long lives

			And even the extensive happiness of a chakravatin king!

			This concludes the sixth chapter of Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, entitled ‘Relying upon Patience’.





Chapter 7: Relying upon Effort





		 			When I find myself assailed by a host of delusions,

			I will oppose them in a thousand ways.

			Like a lion among a group of foxes,

			I will not allow myself to be harmed by delusions.





		 			CHAPTER 7

			Relying upon Effort

			(1)	With the practice of patience I should train in effort

			Because the fruit of enlightenment depends upon it.

			Just as a candle flame cannot move without wind,

			So the collections of wisdom and merit cannot grow without effort.

			(2)	Effort is a mind that delights in virtue.

			Its opponents are the laziness of indolence,

			The laziness of being attracted to non-virtuous actions

			And the laziness of discouragement.

			(3)	The laziness of indolence develops

			When, through being attracted to worldly pleasures,

			And particularly to the pleasures of sleep,

			We fail to become disillusioned with the sufferings of samsara.

			(4)	Why do we not realize that while we are caught

			In the snare of delusions such as laziness,

			We are trapped in the net of samsara

			And held within the jaws of the Lord of Death?

			(5)	If I check carefully, I can see that the Lord of Death

			Is systematically slaughtering everyone;

			Yet still I am not concerned about my death,

			Just like an animal unconcerned about being butchered.

			(6)	The Lord of Death is looking for his next victim

			So that he can prevent him from travelling the path to liberation,

			And that victim might well be me;

			So how can I just indulge in worldly pleasures?

			(7)	The time of death will come quickly,

			So accumulate wisdom and merit while you can.

			Do not wait until the time of death to abandon laziness,

			For then it will be too late!

			(8)	With some things not yet started

			And others half-finished,

			The Lord of Death will suddenly strike

			And I shall think, ‘Oh no, this is the end for me!’

			(9)	When I become a victim of the Lord of Death,

			My relatives – their eyes red and swollen with sorrow

			And their faces flushed with tears –

			Will finally give up hope.

			(10)	Tormented by memories of my previous non-virtues

			And hearing the sounds of impending hell,

			Out of terror I shall cover myself in excrement!

			What shall I be able to do in such a pathetic state?

			(11)	If even in this human life I shall experience terror

			Like that felt by a fish being cooked alive,

			What can be said of the unbearable sufferings of hell

			That I shall experience as a consequence of my non-virtuous actions?

			(12)	As a result of the non-virtues I have committed,

			I shall be reborn in the hot hells

			Where my tender, young flesh will be scalded by hot, molten metals;

			So how can I remain at ease under the control of laziness?

			(13)	I wish for higher attainments without having to make any effort,

			Permanent freedom without having patiently to endure any pain,

			And to remain like a long-life god while living in the jaws of death.

			How foolish I am! When death comes, I shall be overwhelmed by suffering!

			(14)	By depending upon this boat-like human form,

			We can cross the great ocean of suffering.

			Since such a vessel will be hard to find again,

			This is no time to sleep, you fool!

			(15)	Why do I forsake the joy of holy Dharma,

			Which is a boundless source of happiness,

			Just to seek pleasure in distractions and meaningless pursuits

			That are only causes of suffering?

			(16)	Without being discouraged, I should collect wisdom and merit

			And strive for self-control through mindfulness and alertness.

			Then I should equalize self and others

			And practise exchanging myself with others.

			(17)	I should not discourage myself by thinking,

			‘How shall I ever become enlightened?’

			For the Tathagatas, who speak only the truth,

			Have said that it can be so.

			(18)	It is said that even flies, bees, gnats

			And all other insects and animals

			Can attain the rare and unsurpassed state of enlightenment

			Through developing the power of effort;

			(19)	So why should I, who am born a human,

			And who understands the meaning of spiritual paths,

			Not attain enlightenment

			By following the Bodhisattva’s way of life?

			(20)	Some people might be discouraged out of fear

			Of having to sacrifice their flesh,

			But this is due to not understanding

			What we should give, or when.

			(21)	In our previous lives, over countless aeons,

			We have been cut, stabbed, burned

			And flayed alive innumerable times;

			But we have not achieved anything from these hardships.

			(22)	Yet the hardships we must forbear to attain enlightenment

			Are insignificant compared to these.

			It is like enduring the lesser suffering of surgery

			So as to stop much greater pain.

			(23)	If doctors have to use unpleasant medical treatments

			To cure people of their illnesses,

			I should be able to forbear a few discomforts

			To destroy the many sufferings of samsara.

			(24)	But Buddha, the Supreme Physician, does not use

			Ordinary treatments such as these;

			Rather, he uses extremely gentle methods

			To eliminate all the great diseases of the delusions.

			(25)	To begin with, Buddha, the Guide, encourages us

			To practise giving such things as food.

			Later, when we become used to this,

			We can gradually learn to give our own flesh.

			(26)	When eventually we develop a mind

			That regards our body as being just like food,

			What discomfort shall we feel

			From giving away our flesh?

			(27)	The Bodhisattva has abandoned non-virtue and so does not experience physical suffering;

			And, because he clearly realizes emptiness, he does not experience mental pain.

			By contrast, we are afflicted by wrong conceptions

			And our bodies and minds are harmed by non-virtuous actions.

			(28)	Because of his merit, the Bodhisattva experiences physical happiness,

			And because of his wisdom, mental joy;

			So even if this compassionate one must abide in samsara for the sake of others,

			How could he ever be perturbed?

			(29)	Through the power of his bodhichitta,

			He purified all his previous non-virtue;

			And because he accumulates vast collections of merit and wisdom,

			He is said to surpass the Hearers.

			(30)	Having mounted the steed of bodhichitta

			That dispels mental discouragement and physical weariness,

			The Bodhisattva travels the path from joy to joy.

			Knowing this, who could ever be discouraged?

			(31)	The four powers that assist us in working for the benefit of others

			Are the powers of aspiration, self-confidence, joy and rejection.

			The power of aspiration is generated by contemplating the benefits of virtuous actions

			And developing fear of the cycle of suffering.

			(32)	Having overcome all three types of laziness,

			I should continuously strive to increase my effort

			Through aspiration, self-confidence, joy and rejection,

			And through the force of familiarity and mental suppleness.

			(33)	In the past, I have accumulated

			Countless non-virtuous actions,

			Even just one of which can cause me

			To experience many aeons of suffering,

			(34)	But, because of my laziness,

			I have not purified any of these evils

			And so I remain as an abode of infinite suffering.

			Why does my heart not crack open with fear?

			(35)	I need to attain the good qualities of a Bodhisattva

			For the sake of myself and others,

			But it might take me many aeons

			To accomplish just one of these.

			(36)	Up to now, I have not familiarized myself

			With even a fraction of these good qualities.

			How tragic it would be if I were now to waste

			This rare and precious rebirth on meaningless pursuits!

			(37)	Do I have faith and respect in Buddha?

			Have I practised his teachings, the Dharma?

			Do I rely upon the supreme spiritual friends, the Sangha?

			Have I fulfilled the wishes of the poor and needy?

			(38)	Do I give help to those in danger

			Or relief to those who are suffering?

			No! All I have done is experience the discomforts

			Of being in my mother’s womb, and all the subsequent sufferings.

			(39)	In my previous lives I held views

			That denied Buddha’s teachings

			And, as a result, I am now very poor in spiritual realizations.

			Knowing this, how can I give up the practice of Dharma?

			(40)	Buddha, the Able One, has said

			That the root of Dharma is the intention to practise it.

			We can generate this intention by meditating

			On the law of karma, or actions and their effects.

			(41)	All physical suffering and mental unhappiness,

			All the different types of fear,

			And the suffering of being separated from what we want

			Arise from non-virtuous actions.

			(42)	Through committing non-virtuous actions,

			Even though we may wish for happiness

			We shall be pierced by the weapons of suffering

			Wherever we find ourself;

			(43)	But, through performing virtuous actions with a pure intention,

			We shall be sustained by a happiness

			That results from that merit,

			Wherever we are reborn.

			(44)	Those born in Buddha’s Pure Land arise from the lotus of pure actions performed through receiving the light of Conqueror Buddha’s blessings.

			They are completely pure, uncontaminated by delusions, like a lotus unstained by mud.

			Nourished by hearing Conqueror Buddha’s speech directly, they experience supreme inner peace.

			All this happiness and goodness is the result of virtuous actions, such as the six perfections, prayer and dedication.

			(45)	By contrast, those born in hell, on the fiery ground of red-hot iron, suffer at the hands of the henchmen of the Lord of Death,

			Who tear open their skin and pour molten copper into their bodies

			And then, piercing them with flaming swords and spears, cut their flesh into hundreds of fragments.

			Such sufferings, which are experienced for many aeons, are the result of non-virtuous actions.

			(46)	Therefore, I should always keep the intention to accumulate virtues, not non-virtues,

			And put this intention into practice with strong effort.

			As mentioned in Vajradotsa Sutra,

			Whatever Dharma practice I study, I should complete it with strong confidence.

			(47)	First, I should examine what is to be done,

			To see whether I can do it or not.

			If I am unable to do it, I should not start it;

			But, once I start something, I should never turn back.

			(48)	Otherwise this habit will carry into my future lives

			And my non-virtue and suffering will continue to increase.

			Moreover, other virtuous actions will take a long time to accomplish

			And will yield only meagre results.

			(49)	I should maintain self-confidence in three things:

			My Dharma practice, my Dharma activities and overcoming my own delusions.

			I should encourage myself by thinking, ‘I alone will lead all living beings to the happiness of enlightenment’,

			And in this way sustain my self-confidence in these three things.

			(50)	Unlike me, worldly beings are powerless.

			Being under the control of delusion and karma,

			They are unable to make their lives meaningful.

			Therefore, I will practise virtue for their sake.

			(51)	How can I sit and do nothing

			While others waste their lives on meaningless tasks?

			Although it might seem like self-importance,

			I should act out of self-confidence, which is quite different from self-importance.

			(52)	If a snake lies dying on the ground,

			Crows will act like brave eagles and attack it.

			In the same way, if my self-confidence is weak,

			Even the slightest adversity will be able to harm me.

			(53)	If, out of laziness, I give up trying,

			How shall I ever attain liberation in such a feeble state?

			But if, out of self-confidence, I generate effort,

			It will be difficult for even the greatest adversity to harm me.

			(54)	Therefore, with a steadfast mind

			I will overcome all downfalls

			For, if I am defeated by a downfall,

			My wish to triumph over all obstacles will be but a joke.

			(55)	‘I will conquer all obstacles,

			And none shall conquer me.’

			Thus I, who will become a Conqueror,

			Will practise with self-confidence.

			(56)	Anyone who is governed by the view of self-importance

			Is under the influence of delusion, not self-confidence.

			Such a person has succumbed to the enemy of the self-important view,

			Whereas one with self-confidence has not.

			(57)	Those who are inflated by the deluded view of self-importance

			Will be reborn in the lower realms;

			And, if they later take rebirth in a human form,

			They will be poor and miserable, like slaves eating others’ food.

			(58)	Stupid, ugly and feeble, they will be despised by everyone.

			So-called ‘tough people’ who are puffed up with pride

			Are also counted among the self-important –

			Who could be more pathetic than they are?

			(59)	By contrast, whoever develops the self-confidence to conquer the enemy of the self-important view

			Is a self-confident one who is a true conquering hero;

			And whoever completely eradicates the enemy of the self-important view

			Will be able to fulfil the temporary wishes of living beings and bestow upon them the fruit of enlightenment.

			(60)	When I find myself assailed by a host of delusions,

			I will oppose them in a thousand ways.

			Like a lion among a group of foxes,

			I will not allow myself to be harmed by delusions.

			(61)	Just as people protect their eyes

			When in dangerous situations,

			So, whenever there is a danger of the delusions,

			I will protect myself from their influence.

			(62)	It would be far better for me to be burned to death

			Or to have my head cut off

			Than it would be for me ever to submit

			To the enemy of the delusions.

			(63)	Like a Bodhisattva, I should long to work for others

			With the same enthusiasm as that possessed by someone

			Who thoroughly enjoys playing a game.

			I should never tire, but experience uninterrupted joy.

			(64)	Although it is uncertain whether the result will be happiness or suffering,

			Worldly people still work hard to make themselves happy;

			So why do we not derive joy from the practice of Dharma,

			Which definitely results in happiness?

			(65)	I have a strong wish to pursue objects of desire,

			Which, like honey on a razor’s edge, give no real satisfaction;

			But it would be far better to develop a strong wish to pursue virtuous actions,

			Which result in the everlasting happiness of liberation from all suffering.

			(66)	Therefore, to complete the virtuous actions mentioned above,

			I will engage in them with the same enthusiasm

			As that with which an elephant, tormented by the heat of the day,

			Plunges into a cool, refreshing pool.

			(67)	If I become weak or tired, I should stop what I am doing

			And continue with it once I have rested.

			When I have done something well, I should not be attached,

			But move on to what needs to be done next.

			(68)	Just as a seasoned warrior on the battlefront

			Approaches the enemy’s weapons with care,

			So will I protect myself from the weapons of the delusions

			And bind these enemies so that I can destroy them.

			(69)	If someone drops his weapon during a battle,

			Out of fear he will immediately pick it up again.

			Likewise, if I ever lose the weapon of mindfulness,

			I will recall the sufferings of hell and out of fear restore it straightaway.

			(70)	Just as a little poison will spread throughout the body

			With the circulation of the blood,

			So, given an opportunity,

			The delusions will spread throughout my mind.

			(71)	A Dharma practitioner should practise as attentively

			As a person would walk if he were forced to carry a jar brimming with oil,

			Fearful in the knowledge that, if he spilled just one drop,

			The tormentor behind him would slay him with a sword.

			(72)	Therefore, just as I would quickly jump up

			If a snake were to crawl into my lap,

			So, whenever sleep or laziness threaten,

			I will swiftly remove them from my mind.

			(73)	Each time faults such as delusions arise,

			I will thoroughly chastise myself

			And then focus for a long time

			On the determination not to let that happen again.

			(74)	In this way, in all situations

			I will acquaint myself with mindfulness –

			Sincerely and purely practising Dharma

			So that I can protect myself and others from suffering.

			(75)	To ensure that I have the strength for all of this,

			Before I commence I will recall

			The instructions on conscientiousness

			And rise to these tasks with suppleness of body and mind.

			(76)	Just as a piece of cotton moving back and forth

			Is controlled by the movement of the wind,

			So with my body, speech and mind controlled by the joy of effort

			I will swiftly accomplish all realizations.

			This concludes the seventh chapter of Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, entitled ‘Relying upon Effort’.





Chapter 8: Relying upon Mental Stabilization





		 			When shall I withdraw into the forest

			And live among the trees

			With birds and deer who say nothing unpleasant

			But are a joy to live with?





		 			CHAPTER 8

			Relying upon Mental Stabilization

			(1)	Having generated effort in this way,

			I should place my mind in concentration;

			For a person whose mind is distracted

			Is trapped within the fangs of the delusions.

			(2)	Distractions do not arise for those

			Who abide in physical and mental solitude.

			Therefore, I should forsake the worldly life

			And abandon all disturbing thoughts.

			(3)	Attachment to people, possessions and reputation

			Prevent me from forsaking the worldly life.

			To abandon these obstacles,

			I should contemplate as follows.

			(4)	Realizing that delusions are thoroughly destroyed

			By superior seeing conjoined with tranquil abiding,

			I should first strive to attain tranquil abiding

			By gladly forsaking attachment to worldly life.

			(5)	I, who am decaying moment by moment, have attachment to others

			Who are also decaying moment by moment.

			As a result of this, I shall not be able to see

			Pure, attractive objects for thousands of lifetimes.

			(6)	If I do not see someone whom I find attractive,

			I become unhappy and cannot place my mind in concentration;

			Yet, when I do see that person, I find no satisfaction

			But am just as tormented by attachment as I was before.

			(7)	Having strong attachment to other living beings

			Obstructs the correct view of emptiness,

			Prevents renunciation for samsara,

			And causes great sorrow at the time of death.

			(8)	While we preoccupy ourself with the things of this life,

			Our whole life passes without any meaning.

			For the sake of impermanent friends and relatives,

			We neglect the Dharma that leads to permanent liberation.

			(9)	By behaving in such a childish way,

			We definitely create the causes of lower rebirth.

			Since worldly beings lead us to unfortunate states,

			What is the point of relying on them?

			(10)	One moment they are friends,

			The next moment they become enemies;

			And even while they are enjoying themselves, they become angry –

			How unreliable worldly beings are!

			(11)	If I tell them about something that is meaningful, they become angry

			And even try to prevent me from engaging in that meaningful action;

			Yet if I do not listen to what they say, they become angry with that

			And in so doing create the causes of lower rebirth!

			(12)	The childish are jealous of anyone superior to them,

			Competitive with their equals, and arrogant towards their inferiors.

			They are conceited when praised but get angry if criticized.

			There is never any benefit in being attached to them.

			(13)	As a result of associating with the childish,

			We naturally engage in unwholesome actions

			Such as praising ourself, disparaging others

			And discussing the importance of worldly pleasures.

			(14)	The relationships I have made with the childish

			Have been completely deceptive,

			For the childish have done nothing to fulfil my wishes

			And I have done nothing to fulfil theirs.

			(15)	Therefore, I should withdraw to a great distance from the childish.

			If I should subsequently meet them, I should please them by being happy

			And, without becoming too close,

			Act in agreeable ways according to convention.

			(16)	Just as a bee takes pollen from a flower,

			So should I gather only what I need to sustain my practice

			And then, without clinging, return to abide in solitude

			As if I had never met anyone.

			(17)	If people think I have many possessions,

			They will respect me and like me;

			But if I harbour this kind of pride,

			I shall experience terrible fears after I die.

			(18)	O thoroughly confused mind,

			For as many objects as you accumulate,

			You will have to endure a thousand times more suffering

			Because of your attachment to them.

			(19)	Thus, because objects of attachment give rise to fear,

			The wise should not become attached,

			But remain firm in the understanding

			That by their very nature these things are to be left behind.

			(20)	Even if I have acquired many possessions,

			Fame, and a good reputation,

			None of these things

			Can go with me when I die.

			(21)	Why am I unhappy when someone criticizes me

			And happy when I am praised?

			Both criticism and praise are just empty words,

			Like echoes in an empty cave.

			(22)	Living beings have so many different inclinations

			That even Buddha is unable to satisfy them all;

			So what chance do I, an ordinary confused being, have?

			Therefore, I should give up the wish to associate with worldly beings.

			(23)	They look down on those who do not have wealth

			And despise those who do.

			How can people who are so hard to get along with

			Ever see anything but faults in me?

			(24)	Whenever their wishes are not fulfilled,

			The childish become unhappy.

			This is why the Tathagatas have advised us

			Not to associate with them.

			(25)	When shall I withdraw into the forest

			And live among the trees

			With birds and deer who say nothing unpleasant

			But are a joy to live with?

			(26)	Or dwell in a cave or an empty shrine,

			Or abide beneath the trees,

			With a mind unfettered by attachment,

			Which never turns to look back?

			(27)	When shall I live in a place that no one calls ‘mine’ –

			A place that is naturally open and spacious,

			Where I can act freely and do as I wish,

			Without any attachment to body or possessions?

			(28)	With just a few possessions, such as a begging bowl

			And clothes that no one else wants,

			I shall be free from any danger of thieves and robbers.

			In this way, I should live without grasping onto ‘I’ or ‘mine’.

			(29)	I should withdraw to a burial ground

			And meditate on the impermanence of my body

			By thinking that it is really no different from a dead body,

			For both are decaying moment by moment.

			(30)	It might happen that, when I die,

			My body will decay quickly and emit an odour so foul

			That not even foxes will want to come near it!

			I should happily accept that such things could happen.

			(31)	If this body, which is one unit,

			Will break into separate pieces

			Of flesh and bone,

			What can be said of my relationships?

			(32)	At birth I was born alone

			And at death I shall have to die alone.

			Since I cannot share these sufferings with others,

			What use are friends who prevent me from practising virtue?

			(33)	Just as people who travel have no attachment

			To a guest house where they stay for just one night,

			So should I not develop attachment to this body,

			Which is the guest house for just one rebirth.

			(34)	Before such time as this body of mine

			Is borne aloft by four pallbearers

			And worldly beings grieve my passing,

			I will withdraw to the solitude of the forest.

			(35)	Encountering neither friends nor enemies,

			My body will remain in complete solitude.

			If I am already counted among the dead,

			There will be no one to mourn me when I die.

			(36)	Then, with no one around me

			Grieving or planning harm,

			Who will there be to distract me

			From my recollection of holy Buddha?

			(37)	Therefore, I will dwell alone

			In a quiet and peaceful place.

			Happy, contented and with no worries,

			I will strive to pacify all distractions.

			(38)	Having given up all other desires

			And being motivated solely by bodhichitta,

			I will strive to attain single-pointed concentration

			And control my mind by recollecting the meaning of emptiness.

			(39)	Deluded desires give rise to misfortune

			In both this and future lives.

			In this life they cause injury, incarceration and death,

			And in the next the sufferings of the lower realms.

			(40)	For the sake of acquiring a sexual partner,

			People send messages through go-betweens

			And, disregarding any harm to their reputation,

			Commit all manner of non-virtue.

			(41)	Although we engage in harmful actions

			And even sacrifice all our wealth for them,

			What is the real nature of these bodies

			That we like so much to embrace?

			(42)	They are nothing other than skeletons

			That are neither autonomous nor inherently existent.

			Rather than being so desirous and attached to them,

			Why do I not strive to pass beyond sorrow instead?

			(43)	When we are very attached to someone,

			We want to see their face again and again;

			But, whether we see their face or not,

			The real face always remains covered with skin.

			(44)	If we were to remove that skin,

			We would realize that they are not an object of desire

			But an object of aversion;

			So why do we develop attachment for others’ bodies?

			(45)	Although we jealously guard our lover from others’ advances,

			The Lord of Death will take him from us

			And his body will be burned or buried in the ground;

			So what is the point of our jealousy and attachment?

			(46)	Others’ bodies to which we are very attached

			Are just collections of flesh and bone.

			At any moment, they could be destroyed by the Lord of Death;

			So why develop attachment to them?

			(47)	When we see a human corpse, which is a mere collection of flesh and bone,

			We develop fear even though it does not move;

			So why are we not fearful of living bodies, which are also just collections of flesh and bone

			Moving here and there like zombies?

			(48)	Since both dead bodies and living bodies

			Are mere collections of flesh and bone,

			Why am I attracted to living bodies but not to dead ones?

			Thinking in this way, I should stop attachment to others’ bodies.

			(49)	Both saliva and urine come from the same source –

			The intake of fluids into the body –

			So why is it that we like saliva when kissing

			But have no desire for urine?

			(50)	Although cotton is also soft to touch,

			You find no sexual pleasure in a pillow.

			Rather, you think the body does not emit foul smells –

			O desirous mind, you are so confused about what is unclean!

			(51)	Just as we sometimes get angry at other people,

			Why don’t we also get angry at pillows?

			For, although they too are soft to touch,

			We cannot copulate with them!

			(52)	We might feel that what we are attracted to is not impure;

			And yet we want to copulate with others’ bodies,

			Which are just cages of bone tied together with muscles

			And plastered over with the mud of flesh!

			(53)	We have enough impurities of our own

			That we constantly have to contend with;

			So why, out of an obsession with the unclean,

			Do we desire other bags of filth?

			(54)	‘It is the flesh that I enjoy.’

			If this is what you like to see and touch,

			Why do you not want it in its natural state –

			When it is devoid of mind?

			(55)	Any mind that you desire

			Can be neither seen nor touched,

			And anything you can see or touch cannot be mind;

			So why engage in meaningless copulation?

			(56)	Perhaps it is not so strange

			That you do not realize others’ bodies are impure,

			But it is very strange

			That you do not realize your own is.

			(57)	If your main interest is in attractive forms,

			Why do you not prefer to touch such things

			As beautiful young flowers

			Rather than desiring others’ bodies, which are just cages of filth?

			(58)	If you do not want to touch a place

			Covered with impurities such as vomit,

			Why do you want to touch the body

			From which these impurities come?

			(59)	If you are not attached to what is unclean,

			Why do you embrace others’ bodies,

			Which come from impure blood and sperm

			Within an unclean womb?

			(60)	You have no desire for the body of an insect, however small,

			That emerges from a pile of dung;

			So why do you desire a gross, impure body

			That is produced from thirty-six impure substances?

			(61)	Not only do you not disparage

			The impurity of your own body,

			But, out of attachment to what is unclean,

			You desire other bags of filth!

			(62)	Even pure medicinal herbs

			And delicately cooked rice or vegetables

			Will defile the ground on which they land

			If they are spat out after having been in the mouth.

			(63)	Although the impurity of the body is obvious,

			If you still have doubts, go to a burial ground

			And reflect on the impurity of the corpses

			That have been abandoned there.

			(64)	Once you have understood

			That, when the skin is removed,

			The body gives rise to great aversion,

			How can you ever derive pleasure from it again?

			(65)	The fragrance of another’s body comes from other sources,

			Such as the sandalwood with which it is anointed;

			So why are you attracted to a body

			Because of scents that are not its own?

			(66)	Since in its natural state the body smells foul,

			Would it not be better to have no attachment for it?

			Why do those who crave the meaningless things of this world

			Anoint this body with perfume?

			(67)	If the scent comes from perfume, such as sandalwood,

			How can it come from the body?

			Why be attached to others

			Because of a scent that is not theirs?

			(68)	When left naked in its natural state,

			The body is hideous, with long hair and nails,

			Foul-smelling, yellowing teeth

			And a pervasive stench of dirt.

			(69)	Putting so much effort into beautifying it

			Is just like polishing a sword that will be used to harm you.

			It seems the whole world is pervaded by this madness

			Because people believe beauty is only external.

			(70)	Having contemplated the piles of bones in the burial ground,

			Once we turn our mind elsewhere

			And see graveyard cities full of moving bones,

			How can we find pleasure in them?

			(71)	Furthermore, we do not come to enjoy others’ bodies

			Without acquiring material possessions.

			We exhaust ourself in non-virtuous activities to gather these,

			Only to experience suffering in this life and the lower realms in the next.

			(72)	When we are young, we do not have the resources to support a partner;

			And later we are so busy that there is no time to enjoy ourself.

			When at last we have accumulated the resources we need,

			We are too old to indulge our desires!

			(73)	Some, under the influence of desire, work like slaves.

			They tire themselves out working long days

			And, when they return home in the evening,

			Their exhausted bodies collapse like corpses.

			(74)	Some have to experience the disruptions of travel

			Or suffer from being far from home.

			Although they long to be close to their partners,

			They do not see them for years at a time.

			(75)	Some, confused about how to earn what they desire,

			Effectively sell themselves to others.

			Even then they do not get what they want

			But are driven without meaning by the needs of others.

			(76)	Then there are those who sell themselves into servitude

			And work for others without any freedom.

			They live in lonely, desolate places

			Where their children are born with only trees for shelter.

			(77)	Deceived by desire, people become fools.

			Some think, ‘I need money to support my life’,

			And, although they fear for their lives, go off to war;

			While others enslave themselves for the sake of profit!

			(78)	Some, as a consequence of their desires,

			Suffer cuts to their bodies

			Or are stabbed, impaled

			Or even burned.

			(79)	We should realize that a preoccupation with wealth leads to endless problems

			Because acquiring it, protecting it and losing it all involve pain.

			Those who allow themselves to become distracted out of attachment to wealth

			Will find no opportunity to escape from the miseries of samsara.

			(80)	People attached to a worldly life

			Experience many such problems, and for little reward.

			They are like a horse forced to pull a cart,

			Who can grab only an occasional mouthful of grass to eat.

			(81)	Those who are driven by uncontrolled desires

			Waste this precious freedom and endowment, so hard to find,

			For the sake of a few petty rewards that are in no way rare,

			For even animals can obtain them.

			(82)	Our objects of desire will definitely perish,

			And then we shall fall into the lower realms.

			If we consider all the hardships we have endured since beginningless time

			In pursuing meaningless worldly pleasures,

			(83)	We could have attained the state of a Buddha

			For a fraction of the difficulty!

			Worldly beings experience much greater suffering than those who follow the path to enlightenment –

			And yet they do not attain enlightenment as a result!

			(84)	If we consider the sufferings of hell and so on,

			We shall see that the discomforts endured by worldly people in this life –

			Such as those caused by weapons, poison, enemies or treacherous places –

			Bear no comparison in their severity.

			(85)	Thus, having become disillusioned with worldly desires,

			We should generate the wish to abide in solitude.

			Fortunate ones stroll in quiet and peaceful places,

			Far away from all conflict and objects of delusion.

			(86)	Cooled by flower-scented moonlight

			And fanned by peaceful, silent breezes,

			They abide joyfully without distraction,

			With their minds focused on benefiting others.

			(87)	They dwell for as long as they wish

			In empty houses, beneath trees, or in remote caves.

			Having abandoned the pain of clinging to and guarding possessions,

			They live independently, free from all cares.

			(88)	They live freely without attachment

			And unbound by any relationships.

			Even the most powerful humans and gods

			Cannot find a life as contented and happy as this!

			(89)	Thus, having contemplated

			The good qualities of solitude,

			I should completely pacify all disturbing conceptions

			And meditate on bodhichitta.

			(90)	First, I should apply myself to meditation

			On the equality of self and others.

			Because we are all equal in wanting to experience happiness and avoid suffering,

			I should cherish all beings as I do myself.

			(91)	Although there are many different parts of the body, such as the arms and the legs,

			We protect all these parts as equally as we protect the body itself.

			In a similar way, although there are many different living beings,

			I should cherish them all as equally as I cherish myself.

			(92)	The suffering I experience

			Does not harm others,

			But I find it hard to bear

			Because I cherish myself.

			(93)	Likewise, the suffering of others

			Does not harm me,

			But, if I cherish others,

			I shall find their suffering hard to bear.

			(94)	Therefore, I should dispel others’ suffering

			Simply because it is suffering, just like mine;

			And I should bring happiness to others

			Simply because they are living beings, just like me.

			(95)	If both I and others

			Are the same in that we wish for happiness,

			What is so special about me

			That I work only for my own happiness?

			(96)	And if both I and others

			Are the same in that we wish to avoid suffering,

			What is so special about me

			That I protect myself but not others?

			(97)	But why should I protect others

			If their suffering does me no harm?

			If we cherish only others, we find their suffering hard to bear;

			So we definitely need to protect them.

			(98)	It is not a wrong conception to think

			That it will be I who experiences the future suffering,

			Because it will not be another person who dies

			And yet another who is reborn.

			(99)	‘Surely, whenever there is suffering,

			It should be dispelled by whoever is experiencing it.’

			Then, since the suffering of the foot is not the hand’s,

			Why should the hand help to alleviate it?

			(100)	We alleviate the suffering of the foot with the hand

			Because it is a specific method to relieve this pain.

			It is also incorrect to grasp at an independent self and others –

			Such grasping should be completely abandoned.

			(101)	Things that we call ‘continuums’ or ‘collections’,

			Such as rosaries or armies, are falsely existent.

			Thus, there is no independent possessor of suffering,

			For who is there who has control over it?

			(102)	Since there is no independent possessor of suffering,

			There is no real difference between my own and others’ suffering.

			Thus, we should dispel all suffering simply because it is painful –

			Why cling to false distinctions with such certainty?

			(103)	‘There is no need to dispel everyone else’s suffering!’

			This is not a valid argument.

			If my suffering should be dispelled, so should everyone else’s;

			And if others’ suffering should not be dispelled, neither should mine.

			(104)	‘But such compassion will bring me suffering,

			So why should I strive to develop it?’

			How can compassion bring suffering?

			It is the very nature of a peaceful mind!

			(105)	If, through one person experiencing relatively little suffering,

			The infinite sufferings of living beings can be eliminated,

			A kind-hearted Bodhisattva will gladly endure it

			And delight in working for others.

			(106)	Thus, although the Bodhisattva Supushpachandra understood

			That he would suffer at the hands of the king,

			He did not seek to avoid his own death

			But instead released many others from their suffering.

			(107)	Because one whose mind is acquainted with the equality of self and others

			Derives great joy from relieving the suffering of others,

			For their sakes, he or she would happily enter the deepest hell,

			Just like a wild goose plunging into a refreshing lotus pool.

			(108)	The ocean of joy that will arise

			When all living beings are liberated

			Is everything I wish for –

			So why should I wish for my solitary liberation?

			(109)	But although I work for the benefit of others,

			I should do so without pride or pretension.

			Moved only by the joy of benefiting others,

			I should not hope for any reward.

			(110)	And just as I protect myself

			From anything unpleasant, however small,

			So should I act towards others

			With a compassionate and caring mind.

			(111)	Although there is no I there,

			Through the force of familiarity

			I cling to an I within a body

			That arose from the drops of others’ sperm and blood.

			(112)	In the same way, why can I not

			Identify ‘I’ with the bodies of others?

			Equally, I should not find it hard

			To identify ‘other’ with my own body.

			(113)	Seeing the faults of cherishing myself

			And the many good qualities of cherishing others,

			I should completely forsake self-cherishing

			And become familiar with cherishing others.

			(114)	Just as I regard the hands and so forth

			As limbs of my body,

			So should I regard all living beings

			As limbs of a living whole.

			(115)	Through the force of familiarity, I generate a mind

			That grasps at I with respect to this non-self-existent body;

			So why, through familiarity with cherishing others,

			Should I not develop a mind that grasps at I with respect to others’ bodies?

			(116)	Although I work for others in this way,

			I should not develop pride or pretension;

			And, just as when I feed myself,

			I should hope for nothing in return.

			(117)	Therefore, just as I protect myself

			From anything unpleasant, however small,

			So should I become familiar with

			A compassionate and caring mind towards others.

			(118)	Out of his great compassion,

			Arya Avalokiteshvara even blessed his own name

			To relieve living beings from the fear of self-cherishing;

			So I should recite his name mantra to receive his blessings.

			(119)	Do not turn away from learning to cherish others because it is difficult.

			For example, a person’s lover may once have been her enemy, the mere sound of whose name induced fear;

			But now through familiarity she cherishes him

			And becomes unhappy when he is not around.

			(120)	Thus, whoever wants to swiftly protect

			Both themselves and others

			Should practise this holy secret

			Of exchanging self with others.

			(121)	Because we have attachment for our body,

			Even a small object of fear frightens us greatly;

			So who would not revile as an enemy

			Cherishing this body, which is the source of that fear?

			(122)	Out of our wish to find remedies

			For the body’s hunger, thirst, and sickness,

			We kill birds, fish, and other animals

			And even resort to attacking people!

			(123)	Sometimes for money or other possessions

			We might even kill our father or mother,

			Or steal the property of a spiritual community,

			And as a consequence burn in the fires of hell.

			(124)	Who with wisdom would cherish oneself

			Or grasp at this body?

			We should view the self-cherishing mind as a foe

			And despise it accordingly.

			(125)	‘If I give this to others, what shall I have to enjoy?’

			Such self-cherishing is the mind of a hungry spirit.

			‘If I enjoy this, what shall I have to give to others?’

			Such cherishing of others is the mind of the enlightened ones.

			(126)	If we harm others for the sake of our own happiness,

			We shall suffer the torments of the lower realms;

			But if we are harmed for the sake of others’ happiness,

			We shall experience the happiness of higher rebirth.

			(127)	If we hold ourself in high esteem, we shall be reborn in the lower realms

			And later, as a human, experience low status and a foolish mind;

			But if we transfer this esteem to others, we shall be reborn in fortunate realms,

			Command respect, and enjoy good company and pleasant surroundings.

			(128)	If we use others for our own selfish means,

			We shall experience servitude ourself;

			But if we use ourself for the sake of others,

			We shall enjoy high status and pleasing forms.

			(129)	All the happiness there is in this world

			Arises from wishing others to be happy,

			And all the suffering there is in this world

			Arises from wishing ourself to be happy.

			(130)	But what need is there to speak at length?

			The childish work only for themselves,

			Whereas the Buddhas work only for others –

			Just look at the difference between them!

			(131)	If we do not exchange our happiness

			For the suffering of others,

			We shall not attain the state of a Buddha

			And even in samsara there will be no happiness.

			(132)	Never mind what will happen in future lives;

			With employees not providing adequate service

			Or employers not giving proper reward,

			Even our wishes in this life will remain unfulfilled.

			(133)	By not cherishing others, we lose the excellent qualities of our human life

			That allow us to attain happiness both now and in the future;

			And if we actually inflict harm on others,

			Out of ignorance we shall bring unbearable suffering upon ourself.

			(134)	If all the torment in this world –

			All mental fear and physical pain –

			Arise from cherishing oneself,

			What use is this fearful spirit to us?

			(135)	Without destroying fire,

			We cannot stop being burned;

			Likewise, without destroying self-cherishing,

			We cannot stop experiencing suffering.

			(136)	Therefore, to eliminate my pain

			And pacify the suffering of others,

			I will give myself completely to others

			And consider them as precious as I now consider myself to be.

			(137)	I completely dedicate myself to the happiness of others.

			From now on, mind, you must understand this clearly

			And not think of anything

			Other than benefiting all living beings.

			(138)	Because my eyes and so forth are now at the disposal of others,

			I should not use them for my own purpose;

			Nor should I use them in any way

			That is contrary to the welfare of others.

			(139)	Being principally concerned for others,

			I will take anything

			That I regard as belonging to myself

			And use it to benefit them.

			(140)	Putting myself in the place of those who are lower than, equal to, and higher than me,

			And then regarding my former self as ‘other’,

			With my mind free from the crippling conception of doubt

			I should meditate on jealousy, competitiveness and pride.

			(141)	‘He is honoured, but I am not.

			I do not have the wealth he has.

			He is praised, but I am despised.

			He is happy, but I suffer.

			(142)	‘I have much heavy work to do,

			While he remains comfortably at rest.

			His reputation has spread throughout the world,

			But all I am known for is my lack of good qualities.

			(143)	‘But what do you mean, “I have no good qualities?”

			I have many such qualities.

			In comparison with many, he is inferior,

			While there are many to whom I am superior.

			(144)	‘My morals, views, and so on degenerate

			Through the force of my delusions, not because I want them to.

			You, Bodhisattva, should help us regenerate them in any way that you can,

			And willingly forbear any hardships you might encounter in doing so.

			(145)	‘But he does nothing to help us,

			So why does he make us feel so insignificant?

			What use are his so-called good qualities to us?

			He never uses them for our benefit!

			(146)	‘Not only does he have no compassion

			For beings such as us dwelling within the jaws of the lower realms;

			Externally he displays pride in his own good qualities

			And prefers to contend with the wise.’

			(147)	‘This Bodhisattva is regarded as my equal,

			But so that I might outshine him

			I will acquire wealth and reputation,

			And defeat him in debate.

			(148)	‘I will proclaim my own good qualities to the whole world

			By whatever means I can,

			But I will make sure that no one ever hears

			Of any good qualities he might possess.

			(149)	‘I will hide my own faults but make his known.

			I will be venerated by others but ensure that he is not.

			I will acquire a great deal of material wealth

			And encourage others to honour me, but not him.

			(150)	‘For a long time, I will take pleasure

			In seeing him be humiliated.

			I will make him the laughing stock of all

			And an object of ridicule and blame.’

			(151)	‘It is said that this deluded being

			Is vying to be my equal,

			But how can he compare with me in learning or wisdom,

			Or in looks, status, or wealth?

			(152)	‘When others hear of my good qualities

			As they are proclaimed to the world,

			May they experience so much delight

			That their hair pores tingle with excitement.

			(153)	‘And as for whatever he owns,

			Since he is supposed to be working for us,

			We will allow him just what he needs

			And take the remainder by force for ourselves.

			(154)	‘Thus, may his happiness decline,

			While we continue to burden him with our problems.’

			Countless times in samsaric rebirths,

			This self-cherishing attitude has caused me harm.

			(155)	O mind, because you wish to benefit yourself,

			All the hard work you have done

			For countless aeons in samsara

			Has resulted only in suffering.

			(156)	Therefore, I will definitely engage

			In working for the benefit of others;

			And because Buddha’s teachings are non-deceptive,

			I shall experience excellent results in the future.

			(157)	If in the past I had practised

			Exchanging myself with others,

			I would not now be in this situation –

			Devoid of the excellent happiness and bliss of Buddhahood.

			(158)	Just as I am familiar with developing the thought ‘I’, ‘I’,

			When perceiving my body, which arose from others’ sperm and blood,

			So should I become familiar with developing the thought ‘I’, ‘I’,

			When perceiving others’ bodies.

			(159)	Examining myself thoroughly

			To make sure I am working for others,

			I will take whatever I possess

			And use it to benefit them.

			(160)	I am happy but others are sad;

			I have a high position but others are lowly;

			I benefit myself but not others –

			Why am I not jealous of myself?

			(161)	I must give my happiness to others

			And take their suffering upon myself instead.

			I should constantly examine my behaviour for faults

			By asking, ‘Why am I acting in this way?’

			(162)	If others do something wrong,

			I will transform it into a fault of my own;

			But if I cause even the slightest harm to others,

			I will declare it openly in the presence of many.

			(163)	I should spread the fame of others farther,

			So that it completely outshines my own;

			And, regarding myself as a lowly servant,

			Employ myself in the service of all.

			(164)	Being full of faults, I should not praise myself

			Just because of some superficial good quality.

			I will not let even a few people know

			Of any good qualities I might possess.

			(165)	In short, may the harm I have caused others

			For the sake of myself

			Return and ripen upon me

			For the sake of others.

			(166)	I should not be domineering

			Or act in self-righteous ways.

			Rather, I should be like a newly-wed

			Who is bashful, timid and restrained.

			(167)	In this way, selfish mind, you should avoid non-virtue.

			If you do not observe this discipline,

			I will bring you under control

			Through the power of mindfulness and alertness.

			(168)	However, if you choose not to act

			In the way that you have been advised,

			Since you are the source of all my misfortune

			I will completely annihilate you.

			(169)	The time when you could govern me

			Has been consigned to the past.

			Now that I see you to be the source of all my problems,

			I will eradicate you wherever you appear.

			(170)	Now I will immediately cast aside

			All thoughts to work for my own sake.

			O self-cherishing mind, I have sold you to others;

			So stop complaining and get on with helping them!

			(171)	If, out of non-conscientiousness,

			I were not to give you to others,

			You would certainly deliver me

			To the guardians of hell!

			(172)	You have done this to me often enough in the past

			And, as a result, I have suffered for a very long time;

			But now that I have brought to mind all my grudges towards you,

			I am determined to destroy you, selfish mind.

			(173)	Thus, if I want happiness,

			I should not be happy with the self-cherishing mind;

			And if I want protection,

			I should always protect others.

			(174)	To whatever extent I seek

			To fulfil the desires of the body,

			To that extent I shall experience

			A state of dissatisfaction.

			(175)	The desires of the self-cherishing mind

			Cannot be satisfied

			Even by all the wealth in the world –

			So how can we hope to fulfil all its wishes?

			(176)	When our desires are not fulfilled,

			We develop delusions and a dissatisfied mind;

			But whoever becomes free from such distracting concerns

			Will never know dissatisfaction.

			(177)	Therefore, I will never allow

			The desires of the body to increase.

			A person who has no attachment to attractive objects

			Will find contentment – the best of all possessions.

			(178)	My body is a frightening, impure form

			That cannot move without depending upon mind

			And that eventually will completely disintegrate;

			So why do I grasp at it as ‘I’?

			(179)	Whether it lives or dies,

			What use is it to me to grasp at this machine?

			It is no different from grasping at a clod of earth;

			So why do I not give up the pride of grasping ‘my body’?

			(180)	As a result of attending to the body’s desires,

			I have experienced much suffering without real meaning.

			What is the point of generating anger or attachment

			For the sake of something that is like a piece of wood?

			(181)	Whether I care for it in the way that I do,

			Or allow it to be harmed by others,

			The body itself develops neither attachment nor anger;

			So why do I feel so attached to it?

			(182)	Since the body itself does not know

			Anger when it is insulted

			Or attachment when it is praised,

			Why do I go to so much trouble for its sake?

			(183)	‘But I want to cherish this body

			Because it is very beneficial to me.’

			Then why not cherish all living beings,

			For they are very beneficial to us?

			(184)	Therefore, without any attachment,

			I will give up my body for the benefit of all;

			But, although it might have many faults,

			I will look after it while I am working for others.

			(185)	I will put a stop to all childish behaviour

			And follow in the steps of the wise Bodhisattvas.

			Recalling the instructions on conscientiousness,

			I will turn away from sleep, mental dullness and the like.

			(186)	Just like the compassionate Sons and Daughters of the Conqueror Buddha,

			I will patiently apply myself to whatever needs to be done.

			If I do not apply constant effort throughout the day and the night,

			When will my misery ever come to an end?

			(187)	Therefore, to dispel both obstructions,

			I will withdraw my mind from all distracting conceptions

			And place it in constant meditative equipoise

			On the perfect object of meditation, the correct view of emptiness.

			This concludes the eighth chapter of Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, entitled ‘Relying upon Mental Stabilization’.





Chapter 9: The Perfection of Wisdom





		 			Buddha taught all the method practices explained above

			To enable us to complete the training in wisdom realizing emptiness.

			Therefore, those who wish to liberate themselves and others from suffering

			Should strive to develop this wisdom.





		 			CHAPTER 9

			The Perfection of Wisdom

			(1)	Buddha taught all the method practices explained above

			To enable us to complete the training in wisdom realizing emptiness.

			Therefore, those who wish to liberate themselves and others from suffering

			Should strive to develop this wisdom.

			(2)	The two truths are explained as conventional truths and ultimate truths.

			Ultimate truth, emptiness, is a non-affirming negative phenomenon

			That cannot be realized directly by a mind that has dualistic appearance,

			For such minds are conventional, and thus mistaken awareness.

			(3)	Of those who assert the two truths, two types of person can be distinguished:

			Madhyamika-Prasangika Yogis and proponents of things.

			The views held by the proponents of things, who assert that things are truly existent,

			Are refuted by the logical reasonings of the Prasangika Yogis.

			(4)	Moreover, among the Prasangika Yogis, there are different levels of insight –

			Those with greater understanding surpassing those with lesser understanding.

			All establish their view through valid analytical reasons.

			Giving and so forth are practised without investigation for the sake of achieving resultant Buddhahood.

			(5)	When you proponents of things see things,

			You do not recognize their illusion-like character

			But assert them to be inherently existent.

			This is where we Madhyamika-Prasangikas disagree with you.

			(6)	Forms that we see directly are just mere appearance to mind.

			They exist falsely because the way they appear

			Does not correspond to the way they exist,

			Just as a human body is conventionally accepted as clean when in reality it is impure.

			(7)	Buddha taught the impermanence of things

			To lead people gradually to a realization of emptiness –

			The lack of inherent existence of things.

			‘Then it is incorrect to say that things exist even conventionally.’

			(8)	No, there is no fault, because things exist by conventional valid cognizers.

			From the point of view of worldly people, seeing things is seeing reality;

			But worldly people never actually see reality

			Because the real nature of things is their emptiness.

			(9)	Just as you receive merits you consider to be truly existent from making offerings to a Buddha you consider to be truly existent,

			So we receive illusion-like merits from making offerings to an illusion-like Buddha.

			‘If, as you say, living beings lack true existence and are like illusions,

			How can they take rebirth after they die?’

			(10)	Provided all the necessary conditions are assembled,

			Even an illusion will come into being.

			Why, simply by virtue of their longer duration,

			Should living beings be any more true?

			(11)	Killing an illusion incurs no actual karma of killing

			Because an illusion has no mind,

			But benefiting or harming an illusion-like person who has an illusion-like mind

			Gives rise to merit and negativity respectively.

			(12)	Because the mantras and so forth that cause an illusion cannot produce mind,

			An illusion does not develop a mind.

			Different types of cause

			Give rise to different types of illusion.

			(13)	There does not exist a single cause that is capable of

			Giving rise to a variety of different results.

			‘If, as you say, nirvana is not truly existent,

			But samsara exists conventionally,

			(14)	‘Then Buddha must be in samsara because nirvana does not exist;

			So what is the point of practising the Bodhisattva’s way of life?’

			Even an illusion does not cease if the continuum of its causes is not cut,

			But once the continuum of samsara’s causes, delusions, is severed,

			(15)	Samsara will not occur, even conventionally.

			Since Buddhas have done this, they have attained nirvana.

			‘The illusion-like forms that you assert do not exist,

			Because you assert that illusion-like awareness lacks true existence.’

			(16)	Since for you Chittamatrins such illusion-like forms do not exist,

			How do forms exist?

			‘Although forms do not exist as external objects, they do exist in another way –

			A form is an aspect, the nature of the mind to which it appears.’

			(17)	You Chittamatrins assert that mind itself appears in the aspect of form.

			If this is so, how does the mind arise?

			Buddha, the Protector of the World, has said

			That the mind cannot behold itself.

			(18)	For example, just as the blade of a sword cannot cut itself,

			So a mind cannot behold itself.

			‘On the contrary, just as a lamp can illuminate both itself and the objects around it,

			So the mind can behold both itself and other phenomena.’

			(19)	If a lamp illuminates itself, then darkness obscures itself,

			And it follows that no one can see darkness because it is obscured!

			‘When clear crystal turns blue, it does so in dependence upon something else;

			But lapis lazuli is by nature blue – it does not depend upon anything else to appear blue.

			(20)	‘Similarly, some awarenesses are related to objects other than themselves,

			Whereas others, such as self-cognizers, are not.’

			The blueness of lapis lazuli does not exist without depending upon anything else –

			It does not create its own nature!

			(21)	‘Even though a lamp does not illuminate itself, it is the nature of illumination.’

			Then you should say that mind does not know itself

			But is the nature of conscious illumination.

			However, you cannot say that it is known by a mind that is substantially different from itself.

			(22)	According to you, if there is no truly existent awareness that knows mind,

			Then mind does not exist;

			In which case it makes no more sense to discuss whether the mind illuminates itself or not

			Than it does to discuss the looks of the daughter of a childless person.

			(23)	‘If self-cognizers do not exist,

			How do we remember subjective consciousness?’

			When we remember the object experienced, we remember the consciousness related to it,

			Just as we would recall being poisoned by an animal bite when we experienced the pain that subsequently occurred.

			(24)	‘If people who have attained states such as tranquil abiding can see the minds of others far away,

			Surely one can see one’s own mind, which is very close.’

			People who apply magical eye lotion can see treasure vases deep beneath the ground,

			But they cannot see the lotion!

			(25)	We have no intention of refuting the existence of

			Eye awareness, ear awareness or any other awareness.

			What needs to be abandoned is the awareness that grasps at truly existent forms and so forth,

			Which is the fundamental cause of all suffering.

			(26)	‘Illusion-like forms are not other than the mind,

			But neither can they be considered to be one with the mind.’

			If they are true, why say they are not other than the mind?

			And if they are not other than the mind, why say they are true?

			(27)	Just as illusion-like forms lack any true existence,

			So it is with the mind that beholds them.

			‘Samsara, like all imputed objects, must have something substantial as its basis;

			Otherwise, it would be completely empty, just like space.’

			(28)	If imputed phenomena, such as samsara, had truly existent bases,

			How could you ever become bound in samsara and how could you ever escape from it?

			According to you, mind cannot be an apprehender related to something it apprehends;

			Rather, it must be an isolated cognition of itself.

			(29)	If the mind exists inherently, or independently,

			Then it is already free from all defilements,

			And it follows that all living beings are already enlightened!

			So what is the point of teaching that everything is just the nature of mind?

			(30)	‘How does realizing that all phenomena are like illusions

			Eliminate delusions?

			After all, a magician who creates an illusion of a woman

			Can still develop attachment for that illusory woman.’

			(31)	This is because the magician has not abandoned

			The deluded tendency to grasp at true existence.

			Thus, when he beholds the illusory woman,

			His tendency to perceive her emptiness is very weak.

			(32)	By developing acquaintance with the view of emptiness,

			We shall eventually abandon grasping at true existence;

			And especially by meditating on the emptiness of emptiness,

			We shall come to abandon grasping at emptiness itself as being truly existent.

			(33)	When it is said that ‘No thing exists’,

			This means that truly existent things do not exist;

			So how could a mind grasping at the true existence of that emptiness remain

			When the basis for such a misconception – grasping at true existence – has been removed?

			(34)	Eventually, when the true existence of things and the true existence of emptiness

			No longer appear to the mind,

			Since there is no other aspect of true existence,

			The mind will abide in the resultant pacified state in which all conceptuality has ceased.

			(35)	Just as wishfulfilling jewels and wish-granting trees fulfil the hopes of humans and gods

			Even though they have no conceptual mind,

			So, through the force of the prayers they previously made and the merit accumulated by fortunate beings,

			Buddhas manifest physical forms in this world.

			(36)	For example, although the Brahmin who consecrated

			The substance in the reliquary known as the ‘Garuda’

			Has long since passed away,

			The reliquary continues to alleviate poisons and so forth.

			(37)	In a similar fashion, a Bodhisattva, while training on the path,

			Creates the ‘reliquary’ of a Buddha through his collections of merit and wisdom;

			And, although he eventually passes beyond sorrow,

			He continues to bestow both temporary and ultimate benefits upon all living beings.

			(38)	‘But if Buddha has no conceptual mind,

			How can there be meritorious results from making offerings to him?’

			It is said in the scriptures that the results will be the same

			Whether the Buddha to whom we make offerings is living or has passed away.

			(39)	Moreover, the scriptures say that the results we receive depend upon our degree of faith,

			Whether we think Buddha is conventionally or ultimately existent when we make the offerings.

			Just as you receive merits from making offerings to a Buddha you consider to be truly existent,

			So do we receive merits from making offerings to an illusion-like Buddha.

			(40)	‘Since we can attain liberation by gaining a direct realization of the four noble truths,

			What is the point of striving to realize emptiness, lack of true existence?’

			It is necessary because the scriptures explain that without the path of wisdom realizing this emptiness,

			It is impossible to attain even the small enlightenment of self-liberation.

			(41-4)	‘Because we do not believe in the Mahayana, your quoting from Mahayana scriptures is pointless.’

			We both believe that the Hinayana scriptures are valid;

			So you should apply your reasons for believing the Hinayana equally to the Mahayana.

			Thus, we understand that both are the holy Dharma taught by Buddha himself.

			Because they do not understand its profundity,

			The Vaibhashika schools deny the Mahayana;

			And because they do not believe in nirvana,

			Some non-Buddhist schools deny the Hinayana.

			Buddha’s purpose in teaching both the Mahayana and the Hinayana

			Was to lead living beings to permanent liberation from the cycle of suffering.

			Focusing on this ultimate aim, practitioners of both the Mahayana and the Hinayana

			Emphasize the three higher trainings of moral discipline, concentration and wisdom.

			(45)	Buddha gave his teachings as medicine to cure the disease of the delusions, the cause of all suffering.

			Some of his teachings are simple and others are very profound.

			If you do not understand his higher, more profound teachings,

			You should not simply conclude that they were not taught by Buddha.

			(46)	The great Master Kashyapa gathered many of Buddha’s teachings,

			Principally the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, Buddha’s Mahayana teachings.

			However, the Vaibhashika schools do not understand the profound meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras;

			Thus, they conclude that these Sutras are not Buddha’s teachings.

			(47)	The principal holders of Buddhadharma were said to be those who have attained nirvana, the Arhats;

			But the Arhats that you proponents of things assert

			Cannot be real Arhats because, according to your view,

			Their minds still grasp at truly existent things.

			(48)	‘They attained nirvana, or liberation, and became Arhats because they abandoned their delusions.’

			You seem to think that, simply by abandoning manifest delusions, one immediately becomes an Arhat;

			But it is clear that even though a person might have temporarily abandoned manifest delusions,

			Nevertheless, he or she still bears the karmic potentials to be reborn in samsara.

			(49)	‘The abandonment that Arhats achieve is not temporary. They definitely do not take rebirth in samsara again

			Because they completely abandon craving, the principal cause of such rebirth.’

			But just as you say that they have non-deluded confusion,

			Why not also say that they have non-deluded craving?

			(50)	These so-called Arhats have pleasant feelings

			That they apprehend to be truly existent.

			Because of feeling, craving develops –

			So they must be subject to the craving.

			(51)	Although for a person who has not realized emptiness – the lack of truly existent things –

			Manifest delusions might be temporarily abandoned, eventually they will manifest again,

			Just as feelings and discriminations return when the concentration on the absorption without discrimination ends.

			Therefore, you must strive to realize emptiness to attain even solitary liberation.

			(52)	The result of a Bodhisattva’s meditation on emptiness

			Is the ability to remain in the abodes of samsara

			Out of compassion for those who suffer due to confusion,

			And free from the extremes of attachment and fear.

			(53)	Since the realization of emptiness is the antidote that removes the darkness

			Of the delusion-obstructions and the obstructions to knowing,

			Why do those who wish to attain enlightenment

			Not meditate on emptiness right away?

			(54)	Thus, it is quite inappropriate to cast aspersions

			On those who hold the view of emptiness;

			Rather, you should meditate without any doubt

			On emptiness, lack of true existence.

			(55)	By all means, be afraid of something

			That is the principal cause of samsaric suffering;

			But, since meditation on emptiness eliminates this suffering,

			Why should you be afraid of emptiness?

			(56)	If there were a truly existent I,

			It would make sense to be afraid of certain things;

			But, since there is no truly existent I,

			Who is there to be afraid?

			(57)	The teeth, hair or nails are not the I,

			Nor are the bones or blood.

			The mucus and phlegm are not the I,

			Nor are the lymph or pus.

			(58)	The body’s fat or sweat are not the I,

			Nor are the lungs or liver.

			None of the other inner organs is the I,

			Nor are the excrement or urine.

			(59)	The flesh or skin are not the I,

			Nor are the body’s warmth or winds.

			The space element of the body is not the I,

			Nor are any of the six consciousnesses.

			(60)	If, as the Samkhya school asserts, a permanent consciousness is the I,

			Then the consciousness that enjoys sound is also permanent;

			But how can it continue to enjoy sound

			When the object, sound, is no longer present?

			(61)	If it can be a subjective consciousness even though its object does not exist,

			Then it follows that even a piece of wood can be a subjective consciousness.

			Nothing can be established as a consciousness

			If there is no object of which to be conscious.

			(62)	‘When no sound is present, the consciousness enjoys other objects such as visual forms.’

			But if it is permanent, why does it not continue to apprehend sound?

			‘Because there is no sound in the vicinity at that time.’

			Well, if there is no object, sound, then there is no subjective apprehender of sound!

			(63)	Moreover, how can an awareness whose nature it is to apprehend sound

			Also be an awareness whose nature it is to apprehend visual forms?

			‘It is like one person who can be considered to be both a father and a son.’

			But this is mere imputation; he is not by nature both.

			(64)	The analogy of father and son does not work for you Samkhyas.

			According to you, the independent creator of all manifests all forms.

			Thus, father and son must be one nature, as must an apprehender of sound and an apprehender of visual forms –

			But such things are not seen by a valid mind.

			(65)	‘It is like an actor changing roles and being seen in different aspects.’

			Well, if the I changes in this way, it cannot be permanent!

			‘Although the aspects change, its nature remains one and the same.’

			But you cannot establish an unchangeable nature of the I, because you deny the ultimate nature of I, the lack of a truly existent I.

			(66)	‘The different aspects are not true, only their nature is.’

			If the aspects are not true, why say their nature is true?

			‘Their nature is true and the same in that they are both merely conscious apprehenders.’

			Well then, all living beings must be one and the same because they are all conscious apprehenders.

			(67)	Moreover, it follows that animate and inanimate phenomena must be one and the same,

			As creations of the general principle, the independent creator of all.

			If all the particular aspects are false,

			How can their basis, their nature, be true?

			(68)	The material I asserted by materialists also cannot be the I,

			Because it is devoid of mind, just like a jug.

			‘But it has a relationship with mind and so it can know objects.’

			When the self, or I, comes to know something, the former self that did not know ceases;

			(69)	But if, as you say, the self is permanent and unchanging,

			How can it form a relationship with mind and become a knower?

			Saying that the self is devoid of mind and unable to function

			Is like saying that space is the self, or I!

			(70)	‘If the self were not permanent but perished in the next moment,

			There would be no relationship between actions and their effects

			Because, if the self perished the moment it committed an action,

			Who would there be to experience its fruits?’

			(71)	There is no point in our arguing about this,

			Because we both assert that the continuum of a person who commits an action

			Is not different from the continuum of the person who experiences its effect;

			But at the time of experiencing the effect, the person who committed the causal action no longer exists;

			(72)	And at the time of committing the causal action,

			It is impossible to see the person experiencing the effects.

			Both the committer of the action and the experiencer of its effects

			Are merely imputed upon a single continuum of a collection of aggregates.

			(73)	Neither the mind of the past nor the mind of the future is the self,

			Because the former has ceased and the latter has yet to be produced.

			‘But surely the mind arising in the present moment is the self.’

			If it were, then the self would not exist in the next moment!

			(74)	If you peel away the layers of the trunk of a plantain tree,

			You will never discover anything substantial.

			In the same way, if you conduct a detailed analysis,

			You will never be able to find a self, or I.

			(75)	‘If living beings have no true existence,

			For whom can we develop compassion?’

			We promise to achieve the goal of Buddhahood

			For the sake of those whom ignorance imputes as truly existent.

			(76)	‘If living beings do not truly exist, who will gain the results of meditating on compassion?’

			It is true that the cause, meditation on compassion, and the result, Buddhahood, do not truly exist; but they do exist nominally.

			Thus, so that the suffering of all living beings may be completely pacified,

			We should not reject the nominally existent compassion which leads to that result.

			(77)	It is suffering and its causes that need to be abandoned,

			And it is the ignorance of self-grasping that causes delusions and suffering to increase.

			‘But there is no way to abandon self-grasping so that it will never recur.’

			On the contrary, meditation on selflessness, or emptiness, is the supreme method for accomplishing this.

			(78)	Neither the feet nor the calves are the body,

			Nor are the thighs or the loins.

			Neither the front nor the back of the abdomen is the body,

			Nor are the chest or the shoulders.

			(79)	Neither the sides nor the hands are the body,

			Nor are the arms or the armpits.

			None of the inner organs is the body,

			Nor is the head or the neck.

			So where is the body to be found?

			(80)	If you say that the body is distributed

			Among all its different parts,

			Although we can say that the parts exist in the parts,

			Where does a separate possessor of these parts abide?

			(81)	And if you say that the entire body exists

			Within each part, such as the hand,

			It follows that there are as many bodies

			As there are different parts!

			(82)	If a truly existent body cannot be found either inside or outside the body,

			How can there be a truly existent body among the parts such as the hands?

			And since there is no body separate from its parts,

			How can there be a truly existent body at all?

			(83)	Therefore, there is no body,

			But, because of ignorance, we see a body within the hands and so forth,

			Just like a mind mistakenly apprehending a person

			When observing the shape of a pile of stones at dusk.

			(84)	For as long as the causes of mistaking the stones for a person are present,

			There will be a mistaken apprehension of the body of a person.

			Likewise, for as long as the hands and so forth are grasped as truly existent,

			There will be an apprehension of a truly existent body.

			(85)	Just as the body lacks true existence, so do its parts such as the hands;

			For they too are merely imputed upon the collection of their parts, the fingers and so forth.

			The fingers, in turn, are merely imputed upon the collection of their parts, such as the joints;

			And, when the joints are separated into their parts, they too are found to lack true existence.

			(86)	The parts of the joints are merely imputed upon a collection of atoms,

			And they, in turn, are merely imputed upon their directional parts.

			Since the directional parts, too, can be further divided,

			Atoms lack true existence and are empty, like space.

			(87)	Therefore, what intelligent person

			Would develop attachment for this dream-like form?

			And since there is no truly existent body,

			Who is truly existent male and who is truly existent female?

			(88)	If painful feelings are truly existent, they can never be changed,

			And it follows that living beings never experience pleasant feelings.

			And if pleasant feelings are truly existent,

			Why do delicious tastes not bring joy to one who is grieving?

			(89)	‘Such a person does develop pleasant feelings, but he or she does not experience them

			Because they are suppressed by the strength of the painful feelings.’

			How can there possibly be a feeling

			That is not experienced?

			(90)	‘When a strong pleasant feeling occurs, there is still a subtle painful feeling.

			The gross feeling of pain is dispelled, and the subtle pain that remains

			Becomes the nature of a subtle pleasant feeling.’

			Well then, that subtle feeling is a pleasant feeling, not a painful one!

			(91)	‘So what you are saying is that painful feelings do not occur at that time

			Because the delicious taste is a cause of their opposite – pleasant feelings.’

			Whether it is a cause of pleasant or painful feelings depends merely upon conceptual imputation;

			Thus, feelings are established as having no inherent existence.

			(92)	The antidote that abandons grasping at truly existent feelings

			Is meditation on and analysis of lack of true existence.

			The superior seeing that arises from analysis of this emptiness, conjoined with tranquil abiding,

			Is the food that nourishes the Yogi’s realizations.

			(93)	If there is space between the partless particles of a sense power and those of its object,

			How can you maintain that they have met?

			But if there is no space between them, they must mix and become completely one;

			In which case, what is it that meets with what?

			(94)	But one partless particle could never penetrate another

			Because they would both be equal in size without any empty space inside.

			Without penetrating, they could not mix;

			And without mixing, they could not meet.

			(95)	To say that two partless things can meet

			Is completely illogical.

			If it were possible, you would be able to detect it;

			So please show me an example!

			(96)	There can be no truly existent meeting between consciousness and form

			Because consciousness has no material qualities.

			Moreover, as we explained previously, there is no truly existent collection;

			So there is no truly existent collection of material particles with which to meet.

			(97)	Thus, if contact is not truly existent,

			The feeling that arises from it must also lack true existence.

			So why exhaust yourself pursuing pleasant feelings?

			And, if there are no truly existent painful feelings, who can be harmed by what?

			(98)	If there are no truly existent feelings,

			There is no truly existent person to experience them.

			Seeing this to be the case,

			Why do we not abandon our craving?

			(99)	All objects of consciousness that give rise to feelings – from visual forms to tactile objects –

			Are like dreams and illusions, utterly devoid of true existence.

			If the mind experiencing feelings is truly existent,

			It cannot experience any feelings that arise simultaneously with it.

			(100)	Moreover, even if you assert that it can remember feelings that have passed, it cannot experience them;

			And it cannot experience feelings that have yet to arise because they do not exist.

			So, feelings cannot experience themselves,

			And no truly existent other consciousness can experience them either.

			(101)	Thus, since the person who experiences feelings does not truly exist

			And feelings themselves do not truly exist,

			How can this selfless collection of aggregates

			Be harmed or benefited by painful or pleasant feelings?

			(102)	Mental consciousness cannot be found in the six powers,

			In the six objects of consciousnesses, such as forms, or in the collection of the two.

			It cannot be found either inside or outside of the body,

			Nor can it be found anywhere else.

			(103)	Mental consciousness is neither the body nor inherently other than the body.

			It is not mixed with the body, nor is it entirely separate from it.

			It is not the slightest bit truly existent.

			This lack of true existence, the emptiness of the mind, is called the ‘natural state of nirvana’.

			(104)	If a sense awareness exists prior to its object,

			What is it aware of?

			If it arises simultaneously with its object,

			In dependence upon what object does it arise?

			(105)	And if a sense awareness is truly existent,

			How can it arise subsequently in dependence upon an object condition?

			In this way, we can understand

			That all six consciousnesses lack true existence.

			(106)	‘Well then, it follows that phenomena cannot exist even conventionally,

			In which case your presentation of the two truths is invalid.

			Moreover, if conventional truths are merely imputed by mistaken minds,

			How can living beings pass beyond sorrow even nominally?’

			(107)	According to our system, to exist conventionally

			Does not mean to be imputed by a mind grasping at true existence.

			A conventional truth, such as body, is imputed by a valid conceptual mind having perceived a valid basis of imputation.

			Without such imputation by a valid mind, there would be no conventional truths.

			(108)	The imputing mind and the object imputed

			Are established in mutual dependence upon each other.

			Each distinct phenomenon is posited by an analytical mind

			According to what is validly known in the world.

			(109)	‘When an analytical mind realizes an object to be non-truly existent,

			Another analytical mind must analyze that mind to realize that it too is non-truly existent.

			That analytical mind, in turn, must be analyzed by another,

			And so the process is endless, which is absurd.’

			(110)	When a valid mind directly realizes the lack of true existence of all phenomena,

			The true existence of that mind is implicitly negated at the same time.

			This non-true existence of both subject and object

			Is also called the ‘natural state of nirvana’.

			(111)	Despite your attempts, you Chittamatrins are unable to establish

			The true existence of the apprehending mind and the object apprehended.

			‘On the contrary, forms, for example, are truly existent because consciousness apprehends them to be so.’

			How can you establish anything with a consciousness that is truly existent?

			(112)	‘We can establish that consciousness is truly existent because the objects it apprehends are truly existent.’

			If you say this, on what basis is the true existence of these objects established,

			Given that they and the consciousness that apprehends them are mutually dependent?

			Surely this demonstrates that both consciousness and its object lack true existence.

			(113)	For example, if a man has no child, he cannot be a father;

			And if there is no father, how can there be a child?

			Since without a child, there is no father, they are mutually dependent and therefore neither is truly existent.

			It is likewise with consciousness and its object.

			(114)	‘From the fact that a truly existent sprout arises from a seed,

			We can understand the true existence of the seed.

			So why, from the fact that a truly existent consciousness arises from an object,

			Can we not understand that the object too is truly existent?’

			(115)	It is true that the existence of a seed can be inferred from the existence of its sprout

			By a consciousness that is substantially distinct from that sprout;

			But what consciousness can cognize a truly existent consciousness

			That, according to you, indicates the true existence of its object?

			(116)	Even worldly people can see clearly

			That most things arise from causes.

			The different types of coloured lotus, for example,

			Arise from a variety of different causes.

			(117)	‘And what gave rise to that variety of causes?’

			A previous variety of causes.

			‘But how does a distinct cause give rise to a distinct effect?’

			Each effect is produced from a specific potentiality in its preceding cause.

			(118)	If you Samkhyas want to say that Ishvara is the creator of all things,

			Then please explain who or what Ishvara is.

			‘He is basically the nature of the four great elements.’

			Then why go to the trouble of giving them the name ‘Ishvara’?

			(119)	Since the elements such as earth are multiple substances,

			Impermanent, unmoved by mind, non-divine

			And something trodden upon and unclean,

			They cannot possibly be Ishvara.

			(120)	Space is not Ishvara because it cannot produce anything,

			And a permanent self cannot be Ishvara because this has already been refuted.

			‘Although he is the creator, Ishvara is unknowable.’

			What is the point of talking about something that cannot be known?

			(121)	Precisely what is it that Ishvara is supposed to create?

			‘He creates the world, living beings, and his own subsequent continuum.’

			But if this is so, how did such an independent creator himself develop?

			Moreover, consciousness is produced from its previous continuum,

			(122)	And, since beginningless time, happiness and suffering have been created by karma, or actions.

			So, tell us, what does Ishvara create?

			If the cause has no beginning,

			The effect must also have no beginning.

			(123)	So why, if their production does not depend upon other conditions,

			Are effects such as happiness and suffering not constantly produced without interruption?

			And if, as you say, there is nothing other than phenomena created by Ishvara,

			Upon what conditions does Ishvara depend when he creates an effect?

			(124)	If a collection of causes and conditions produces an effect,

			That effect is not produced by Ishvara.

			If the causes and conditions are assembled, even Ishvara does not have the power to prevent the effect being produced;

			And, if they are not assembled, he cannot possibly produce that effect.

			(125)	If effects such as suffering are produced without Ishvara’s wishing for them,

			It follows that they are produced through the power of something other than him.

			You say that all effects are produced according to Ishvara’s wishes,

			But those wishes have no power to produce all things, so how can Ishvara be the creator of everything?

			(126)	The assertion that the world and living beings are produced from permanent partless particles

			Has already been refuted.

			You Samkhyas assert that the creator is

			The permanent general principle.

			(127)	You describe this general principle as a balanced state

			Of three qualities: lightness, activity and darkness,

			Which should be understood as the feelings of indifference, pleasure and pain.

			Unbalanced states of these, you say, are the manifestations that constitute the world.

			(128)	If the general principle, the independent creator of all, has a threefold nature,

			It is neither singular nor plural, and therefore does not exist.

			Similarly, the individual qualities cannot exist

			Because you say that each of them is a composite of the three qualities.

			(129)	If the three qualities do not exist, the general principle does not exist,

			In which case it is impossible to establish its manifestations such as visual forms and sounds.

			And it is simply impossible for mindless things, such as clothing,

			To have the same nature as feelings, such as happiness.

			(130)	‘All things truly exist in the nature of their causes.’

			But we have already thoroughly refuted the possibility of truly existent things.

			According to you, clothing and the like arise from the general principle, which is a balanced state of pleasure and so forth;

			But this cannot be the case, because we have refuted the existence of such a general principle.

			(131)	In fact, feelings such as pleasure arise from things such as wearing clothing;

			And when these causes are lacking, their effects – pleasure and so forth – do not occur.

			If the general principle were permanent, its nature of pleasure, for example, would also be permanent;

			But this has never been seen by a valid cognizer.

			(132)	If pleasure were permanent, it would always be manifest;

			So why is it not experienced when pain is manifest?

			‘At those times, the gross feeling of pleasure becomes subtle.’

			How can something that is permanent change from gross to subtle?

			(133)	Something that abandons a gross state and becomes subtle

			Is at one time gross and at another time subtle, and therefore impermanent.

			In the same way, you should assert

			That all functioning things are impermanent.

			(134)	If gross pleasure is not different from pleasure itself,

			Then clearly pleasure, and therefore the general principle, are impermanent.

			You assert that a manifest phenomenon does not exist at the time of its cause

			And thus that a product does not exist at the time of its cause.

			(135)	Although you do not want to assert that a manifest phenomenon that did not previously exist is produced anew,

			In reality this is what you are saying.

			If the effect exists as the same nature as its cause,

			Then eating food is the same as eating the excrement it produces!

			(136)	So instead of spending your money on clothes of woven cotton,

			You might as well purchase cotton seeds to wear!

			‘Worldly people do not see the effect at the time of the cause because of their confusion.’

			Well, what about your teacher, Kapila? He must know because you say he is omniscient;

			(137)	And since you teach his view to worldly people,

			Why can they not see the effect at the time of the cause?

			‘Because worldly people do not see things with valid cognizers.’

			Then the manifest phenomena that they see clearly must also not be true!

			(138)	‘According to you Madhyamikas, valid cognizers are not truly existent, and so they must be false,

			In which case the objects established by them must also be false.

			If this is so, then the emptiness you assert is false,

			And meditating on it serves no purpose.’

			(139)	Without first correctly identifying the object to be negated, true existence,

			You cannot apprehend its negation, or non-existence, emptiness.

			The negation of true existence, emptiness,

			Clearly has no true existence itself.

			(140)	For example, if a mother dreams her child has died,

			The thought that the child no longer exists

			Removes the thought of the child’s existence,

			Even though neither thought is truly existent.

			(141)	Through these various lines of reasoning,

			We have established that production does not occur without a cause,

			And that a result, such as a sprout, does not exist in any of its causes and conditions,

			Either individually or collectively.

			(142)	Effects do not come from anywhere else when they are produced,

			They do not go anywhere when they perish, and they do not inherently abide.

			They appear to be truly existent only because of ignorance,

			But in fact they are like illusions.

			(143)	Examine something produced from causes

			And compare it with an illusion conjured up by a magician.

			Where do they come from when they arise?

			Where do they go to when they perish?

			(144)	We can see that effects arise from causes

			And that, without a cause, there cannot be an effect.

			Thus, things are artificial, like reflections.

			How can they possibly be truly existent?

			(145)	If something is truly existent,

			What need is there for a cause to produce it?

			And if something is non-existent,

			Again, what need is there for a cause to produce it?

			(146)	Even with a hundred million causes,

			A non-thing will never transform into a thing.

			If it remained a non-thing, how could it become a thing?

			From what state could it transform into a thing?

			(147)	While it is not a thing, it cannot exist as a thing;

			So when could it ever become a thing?

			It would be unable to separate from being a non-thing

			Without first becoming a thing;

			(148)	But without its being separated from the state of being a non-thing,

			It is impossible for the state of a thing to arise.

			Likewise, a functioning thing cannot become a permanent phenomenon

			Because, if it did, it would have two mutually exclusive natures.

			(149)	Just as there is no truly existent production of things,

			So there is no truly existent cessation.

			Thus, living beings are not truly born,

			Nor do they truly cease.

			(150)	Living beings are like objects in a dream

			For, when analyzed, they have no ultimate identity, just like a rainbow.

			Thus, in that they both lack true existence, there is no difference

			Between nirvana, the state beyond sorrow, and samsara, the state of sorrow.

			(151)	With objects that are empty in this way,

			What is there to gain and what is there to lose?

			Who is there to praise me?

			And who is there to blame me?

			(152)	With no truly existent benefit or harm,

			What is there to be happy or unhappy about?

			And, when their ultimate nature is sought,

			Where are those who seek a good reputation, and where is what they seek?

			(153)	When examined in this way,

			Who is living and who is it who will die?

			What is the future and what is the past?

			Who are our friends and who are our relatives?

			(154)	I beseech you who are just like me,

			Please know that all things are empty, like space.

			Consider that although all people wish for happiness,

			They swing between being troubled by suffering

			(155)	And being overjoyed by meaningless pleasure.

			Not finding happiness, they suffer; and in striving to fulfil their wishes

			They quarrel, fight and hurt each other with weapons.

			Thus, they consume their lives in the commission of non-virtue.

			(156)	From time to time, they take a fortunate rebirth

			And briefly enjoy some temporary happiness,

			But soon they die and fall into the lower realms,

			Where they experience unbearable suffering for a very long time.

			(157)	In samsara, there are many pitfalls that lead to suffering.

			Instead of finding the path of emptiness that leads to freedom,

			We are bound by its opposite, grasping at true existence.

			But if, while in samsara, we do not find the path of emptiness,

			(158)	We shall continue to experience an unending ocean of suffering

			That is so unbearable it is beyond analogy.

			Even in fortunate rebirths, we shall have little ability to practise virtue,

			And our lives of freedom and endowment will quickly pass.

			(159)	We are constantly striving to avoid sickness and death,

			Fend off hunger, find some rest, or just get to sleep.

			We receive harm from inner and outer obstacles,

			And waste our lives in meaningless company.

			(160)	Thus, our life passes swiftly without any meaning,

			And we find it very hard to realize emptiness.

			In such a state, where is there a method to reverse

			The deluded wanderings of the mind, with which we are so familiar?

			(161)	Furthermore, demonic forces are constantly striving

			To cast us into the vast wasteland of the lower realms.

			There are many mistaken paths to mislead us,

			And we find it difficult to resolve stultifying doubts.

			(162)	It will be very hard to find the freedom and endowment of a human rebirth again.

			Buddhas rarely appear in this world, and it is difficult to find a qualified Mahayana Spiritual Guide.

			Without these, there is no way to stop the flood of delusions –

			Alas, the suffering of living beings will continue without interruption!

			(163)	Oh, surely we must feel compassion for all these poor beings

			Who are swept along in these vast rivers of suffering,

			For, although they suffer in the extreme,

			They do not recognize their suffering state.

			(164)	For example, some ascetics repeatedly wash in freezing water

			And burn themselves with fire again and again;

			And, although they experience great suffering,

			They proudly maintain that they are happy!

			(165)	In the same way, those who live their lives

			As if they were not going to be struck by sufferings such as ageing and death,

			Will experience horrendous suffering at the hands of the Lord of Death

			And then be cast into the unbearable torments of the lower realms.

			(166)	May I be able to extinguish the fires of suffering

			That torment all these beings,

			With a vast rain of happiness

			Descending from the clouds of my merit;

			(167)	And, through sincerely accumulating a collection of merit,

			While endowed with the wisdom realizing non-true existence,

			May I teach emptiness to all living beings

			Who suffer because of their self-grasping.

			This concludes the ninth chapter of Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, entitled ‘The Perfection of Wisdom’.





Chapter 10: Dedication





		 			By virtue of my merits,

			May all beings everywhere,

			Tormented by sufferings of body and mind,

			Find physical comfort and mental joy.





		 			CHAPTER 10

			Dedication

			(1)	Through the virtues I have created

			By composing Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life,

			May all living beings without exception

			Practise the Bodhisattva’s deeds.

			(2)	By virtue of my merits,

			May all beings everywhere,

			Tormented by sufferings of body and mind,

			Find physical comfort and mental joy.

			(3)	For as long as they remain in samsara,

			May their temporary happiness never decline;

			And may they all eventually experience

			The everlasting joy of Buddhahood.

			(4)	May all embodied creatures

			Throughout the universe

			Who are experiencing the pains of hell

			Enjoy the bliss of Sukhavati Pure Land.

			(5)	May those tormented by cold find warmth,

			And may those tormented by heat be cooled

			By a continuous rain of soothing waters

			Flowing from the vast clouds of the Bodhisattvas’ merit and wisdom.

			(6)	May the forest of razor-sharp leaves

			Become a delightful woodland glade,

			And may the trees of splintered iron and piercing thorns

			Transform into wishfulfilling trees.

			(7)	May the regions of hell become joyful lands

			Adorned with vast and fragrant lotus pools

			Resounding with the enchanting calls

			Of wild geese, ducks and swans.

			(8)	May the heaps of burning coals become piles of various jewels,

			May the red-hot iron ground become a soothing crystal floor,

			And may the mountains of the crushing hells

			Become celestial palaces of worship filled with Sugatas.

			(9)	May the hail of lava, blazing stones and weapons

			Henceforth become a rain of flowers,

			And may all attacks with weapons

			From now on become a playful exchange of flowers.

			(10)	May those drowning in the fiery torrents of acid –

			Their flesh eaten away to reveal their lily-white bones –

			Attain the bodies of celestial beings

			And sport with consorts in gently flowing streams.

			(11)	‘Why are the henchmen of the Lord of Death and the unbearable buzzards and vultures so afraid?

			By whose noble power is the darkness of our suffering dispelled and joy bestowed upon us?’

			Looking above them, those in hell will behold the radiant form of Vajrapani, the Holder of the Vajra.

			Through the force of their new-found faith and joy, may they be freed from past evil and come to abide with him.

			(12)	When they see the lava fires of hell extinguished by a rain of flowers moist with scented waters,

			And are immediately satiated with bliss,

			They will wonder by whose hand this was brought about

			And behold Pemapani, the Holder of the Lotus.

			(13)	‘Friends, cast away your fears and quickly gather here,

			For above us is the youthful Manjushri, whose radiant topknot dispels all fears.

			Endowed with great compassion and bodhichitta, he protects all living beings,

			And through his power dispels all suffering and bestows perfect joy.

			(14)	‘Behold him in his enchanting palace resounding with the songs of a thousand celestial beings,

			With hundreds of gods bowing before him, their tiaras touching his lotus feet,

			And a vast rain of flowers falling upon his gracious head, his eyes moist with compassion.’

			Thus, upon seeing Manjushri, may all beings in hell cry out with joy.

			(15)	Likewise, when through my roots of virtue all beings in hell

			Feel the cool, sweet-smelling rain descending from miraculous clouds

			Created by Bodhisattvas such as Samantabhadra,

			May they experience perfect happiness.

			(16)	May all animals be freed from the fears

			Of being preyed upon by one another,

			And may all hungry spirits be as happy

			As the inhabitants of the northern continent.

			(17)	May they be satiated by a stream of milk

			Flowing from the compassionate hands

			Of Arya Avalokiteshvara

			And, by bathing in it, may they be constantly refreshed.

			(18)	May the blind see forms,

			May the deaf hear sounds,

			And just as it was with Mayadevi, the mother of Buddha,

			May all pregnant women give birth without pain.

			(19)	May the naked find clothing,

			May the hungry find food,

			And may the thirsty find pure water

			And delicious drinks.

			(20)	May the poor find wealth,

			May those weak with sorrow find joy,

			And may those whose fortunes have declined

			Find replenishment and long-lasting good fortune.

			(21)	May everyone who is sick

			Be swiftly healed,

			And may every disease that affects living beings

			Be permanently eradicated.

			(22)	May the frightened be released from their fears,

			May those in captivity be freed,

			May the powerless be endowed with power

			And may people think only of benefiting one another.

			(23)	May travellers on the road

			Find happiness wherever they go,

			And without any effort

			Accomplish whatever they set out to do.

			(24)	May those who sail by ship or boat

			Obtain whatever they seek

			And, returning safely to the shore,

			Joyfully reunite with their friends and relatives.

			(25)	May those distressed because they have lost their way

			Meet with fellow travellers

			And, without any fear of thieves or other dangers,

			Proceed comfortably without fatigue.

			(26)	May those in dangerous and fearful places,

			Children, the aged and the unprotected,

			As well as the bewildered and the insane,

			Be guarded by benevolent celestials.

			(27)	May all humans be freed from all the unfree states,

			May they be endowed with faith, wisdom and compassion,

			And may they have the very best food, follow pure conduct

			And always be concerned for their future lives.

			(28)	May they have inexhaustible joy and copious resources,

			Just like the supreme treasury;

			And may they enjoy freedom,

			With no disputes, interferences or injury.

			(29)	May those who possess little splendour

			Be endowed with majesty,

			And may those whose bodies are worn through asceticism

			Attain magnificent and noble forms.

			(30)	May all beings everywhere

			Take rebirth in a gender of their choice,

			And may the lowly and downcast attain grandeur

			Without ever displaying pride.

			(31)	By the power of the merit I have accumulated,

			May all living beings without exception

			Abandon all forms of evil

			And always engage in virtue.

			(32)	May they never be separated from bodhichitta

			And always follow the Bodhisattva’s way of life.

			May they be cared for by Buddhas and Spiritual Guides

			And forsake all demonic activity.

			(33)	While in samsara, may they be reborn in fortunate realms

			And enjoy inconceivably long lives,

			Abiding always in contentment

			Without ever hearing the word ‘death’.

			(34)	May all places throughout the world

			Become gardens of wishfulfilling trees,

			Resounding with the sound of Dharma

			Proclaimed by Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.

			(35)	May the whole ground

			Become completely pure,

			As level as the palm of a hand,

			And as smooth as lapis lazuli.

			(36)	And in every land may there appear,

			For the sake of all disciples,

			Multitudes of Bodhisattvas

			Possessed of excellent qualities.

			(37)	May all living beings uninterruptedly hear

			The sweet sound of Dharma

			Issuing forth from birds and trees,

			Beams of light and even space itself.

			(38)	May they always meet with Buddhas

			And their Sons and Daughters, the Bodhisattvas;

			And may the Spiritual Guides of the world

			Be venerated with clouds of offerings.

			(39)	May celestial beings bring timely rains,

			And may harvests always be plentiful.

			May governments rule in accordance with Dharma,

			And may the people of the world prosper.

			(40)	May all medicines be effective,

			May the recitation of mantras fulfil all wishes,

			And may all spirits and animals who have influence over us

			Be endowed with great compassion.

			(41)	May no one ever experience physical pain,

			Mental anguish or sickness.

			May they be free from all forms of unhappiness,

			And may no one ever be afraid or belittled.

			(42)	In all temples and Dharma centres,

			May recitation and meditation flourish forever.

			May the Sangha always be in harmony,

			And may their wish to benefit others be fulfilled.

			(43)	May Sangha who wish to practise purely

			Find the right conditions to do so

			And, abandoning all distractions,

			Meditate with mental suppleness.

			(44)	May the ordained be materially provided for

			And always be free from harm.

			May no one who has taken ordination

			Ever allow their moral discipline to degenerate.

			(45)	May all those who have broken their moral discipline

			Completely purify their downfalls.

			May they attain a fortunate rebirth

			And never allow their morality to decline again.

			(46)	May those who are learned in Dharma be respected

			And receive material support.

			May their minds be pure and peaceful,

			And may their good qualities be proclaimed in all directions.

			(47)	May they never experience the sufferings of the lower realms

			Or meet with hardships of body, speech or mind.

			May they have forms superior to those of the gods

			And quickly attain the state of a Buddha.

			(48)	May all living beings again and again

			Make offerings to the Buddhas.

			May they become endowed with the eternal bliss

			Of a fully enlightened being.

			(49)	May the Bodhisattvas fulfil the welfare of the world

			In the very manner they have intended,

			And may all living beings receive

			Everything the Buddhas have intended for them.

			(50)	Likewise, may all Solitary Realizers and Hearers

			Attain the happiness of nirvana.

			(51)	And until I attain the level of the Joyous One,

			Through the blessings of Manjushri,

			May I be concerned for all my future lives

			And always receive ordination.

			(52)	May I always live humbly, sustained by simple food.

			Throughout all my lives, may I abide in solitude

			And always find ideal conditions

			For achieving my spiritual goals.

			(53)	Whenever I wish to see a scripture

			Or compose even a single verse,

			May I behold without obstruction

			Protector Manjushri.

			(54)	To fulfil the needs of all living beings

			Reaching to the ends of space,

			May my way of life always resemble

			That of Manjushri.

			(55)	For as long as space exists

			And for as long as living beings remain in samsara,

			May I abide among them

			To dispel all their suffering.

			(56)	May all the suffering of all living beings

			Ripen solely upon me;

			And by the power of the Bodhisattvas’ virtue and aspirations

			May all beings experience happiness.

			(57)	May the Buddhadharma, the sole medicine for all suffering

			And the source of all happiness,

			Be materially supported and honoured,

			And remain for a very long time.

			(58)	I prostrate to Manjushri,

			Through whose kindness my virtuous intentions arise;

			And I prostrate to my Spiritual Guide,

			Through whose kindness my virtuous qualities increase.

			This concludes the tenth chapter of Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, entitled ‘Dedication’.

			This concludes Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, composed by the Buddhist Master Shantideva.





Glossary


			Most of these terms are explained in detail in Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche’s commentary, entitled Meaningful to Behold. Where more detail can be found in Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche’s other books, this is indicated in the glossary entry.

			Absorption without discrimination A concentration of the fourth form realm that observes nothingness and that is attained by stopping gross feelings and gross discriminations. See Ocean of Nectar.

			Aggregates In general, all functioning things are aggregates because they are an aggregation of their parts. In particular, a person of the desire realm or form realm has five aggregates: the aggregates of form, feeling, discrimination, compositional factors and consciousness. A being of the formless realm lacks the aggregate of form but has the other four. A person’s form aggregate is his or her body. The remaining four aggregates are aspects of his mind. See The New Heart of Wisdom.

			Anger A deluded mental factor that observes its contaminated object, exaggerates its bad qualities, considers it to be undesirable and wishes to harm it. See How to Solve Our Human Problems.

			Arhat Sanskrit for ‘Foe Destroyer’. A practitioner who has abandoned all delusions and their seeds by training on the spiritual paths, and who will never again be reborn in samsara. In this context, the term ‘Foe’ refers to the delusions.

			Arya Sanskrit for ‘Superior being’. Someone who has a direct, or non-conceptual, realization of emptiness. There are Hinayana Superiors and Mahayana Superiors.

			Aspiring bodhichitta A mind that aspires to attain enlightenment for the benefit of all living beings but that does not yet engage in the actual practices of the Bodhisattva’s training. It is like someone intending to go somewhere but not yet setting out on the journey.

			Attachment A deluded mental factor that observes a contaminated object, regards it as a cause of happiness, and wishes for it.

			Avalokiteshvara ‘Chenrezig’ in Tibetan. The embodiment of the compassion of all the Buddhas.

			Basis of imputation All phenomena are imputed upon their parts; therefore, any of the individual parts, or the entire collection of the parts, of any phenomenon is its basis of imputation. A phenomenon is imputed by mind in dependence upon its basis of imputation appearing to that mind. See The New Heart of Wisdom.

			Beginningless time According to the Buddhist world view, there is no beginning to mind, and so no beginning to time. Therefore, all living beings have taken countless previous rebirths.

			Blessings The transformation of our mind from a negative state to a positive state, from an unhappy state to a happy state, or from a state of weakness to a state of strength, through the inspiration of holy beings such as our Spiritual Guide, Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.

			Bodhichitta Sanskrit for ‘mind of enlightenment’. ‘Bodhi’ means ‘enlightenment’, and ‘chitta’ means ‘mind’. There are two types of bodhichitta – conventional bodhichitta and ultimate bodhichitta. Generally speaking, the term ‘bodhichitta’ refers to conventional bodhichitta, which is a primary mind motivated by great compassion that spontaneously seeks enlightenment to benefit all living beings. There are two types of conventional bodhichitta – aspiring bodhichitta and engaging bodhichitta. Ultimate bodhichitta is a wisdom motivated by conventional bodhichitta that directly realizes emptiness, the ultimate nature of phenomena. See also Aspiring bodhichitta and Engaging bodhichitta.

			Bodhisattva A person who has generated spontaneous bodhichitta but who has not yet become a Buddha.

			Brahma A worldly god, who resides in the first form realm.

			Buddha A being who has completely abandoned all delusions and their imprints. Every living being has the potential to become a Buddha.

			Chakravatin king An extremely fortunate being who has accumulated a vast amount of merit and as a result has taken rebirth as a king with dominion over all the four continents as described in Buddhist cosmology, or, at the very least, over one of the four continents. At present there are no chakravatin kings in our world, and there is no one who has complete dominion over our continent, Jambudipa. See Great Treasury of Merit.

			Chekhawa, Bodhisattva (AD 1102-1176) A great Kadampa Bodhisattva who composed the text Training the Mind in Seven Points, a commentary to Bodhisattva Langri Tangpa’s Eight Verses of Training the Mind. He spread the study and practice of training the mind throughout Tibet. See Universal Compassion.

			Chittamatra The lower of the two schools of Mahayana tenets. ‘Chittamatra’ means ‘mind only’. They are so called because they assert that all phenomena are merely the nature of mind. A Chittamatrin is a proponent of Chittamatra tenets. See Ocean of Nectar.

			Collection of merit A virtuous action motivated by bodhichitta that is a main cause of attaining the Form Body of a Buddha. Examples are: making offerings and prostrations to holy beings with bodhichitta motivation, and the practice of the perfections of giving, moral discipline and patience.

			Collection of wisdom A virtuous mental action motivated by bodhichitta that is a main cause of attaining the Truth Body of a Buddha. Examples are: listening to, contemplating and meditating on emptiness with bodhichitta motivation.

			Compassion A virtuous mind that wishes others to be free from suffering. See The New Eight Steps to Happiness, Universal Compassion and Modern Buddhism.

			Concentration A mental factor that makes its primary mind remain on its object single-pointedly.

			Conceptual mind A thought that apprehends its object through a generic, or mental, image. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Confession Purification of negative karma by means of the four opponent powers. See The Bodhisattva Vow.

			Conscientiousness A mental factor that, in dependence upon effort, cherishes what is virtuous and guards the mind from delusion and non-virtue. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Contact A mental factor that functions to perceive its object as pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Contentment A happy mind that functions to prevent the problem of discontent.

			Conventional truth Any phenomenon other than emptiness. Conventional truths are true with respect to the minds of ordinary beings, but in reality they are false. See The New Heart of Wisdom.

			Dedication Dedication is by nature a virtuous mental factor; it is the virtuous intention that functions both to prevent accumulated virtue from degenerating and to cause its increase. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Delusion A mental factor that arises from inappropriate attention and functions to make the mind unpeaceful and uncontrolled. There are three main delusions: ignorance, attachment and anger. From these arise all the other delusions, such as jealousy, pride and deluded doubt. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Demi-god A being of the demi-god realm, the second highest of the six realms of samsara. Demi-gods are similar to gods, but their bodies, possessions, and environments are inferior. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Dharma Buddha’s teachings and the inner realizations that are attained in dependence upon practising them. ‘Dharma’ means ‘protection’. By practising Buddha’s teachings, we protect ourself from suffering and problems.

			Distraction A deluded mental factor that wanders to any object of delusion.

			Dualistic appearance The appearance to mind of an object together with the inherent existence of that object. See The New Heart of Wisdom.

			Eight Great Sons The eight principal Mahayana disciples of Buddha Shakyamuni: Avalokiteshvara, Manjushri, Vajrapani, Maitreya, Samantabhadra, Ksitigarbha, Sarvanivaranaviskambini and Akashagarbha. At the time of Buddha, they appeared in the aspect of Bodhisattvas, demonstrating the correct manner of practising the Mahayana paths and helping to spread Buddha’s teachings extensively for the benefit of others.

			Eight Verses of Training the Mind Composed by Bodhisattva Langri Tangpa in the eleventh century, this text reveals the essence of the Mahayana Buddhist path to enlightenment. For a translation and full commentary, see The New Eight Steps to Happiness.

			Eight worldly concerns The objects of the eight worldly concerns are happiness and suffering, wealth and poverty, praise and criticism, and good reputation and bad reputation. These are called ‘worldly concerns’ because worldly people are constantly concerned with them, wanting some and trying to avoid others.

			Engaging bodhichitta After we have taken the Bodhisattva vows, our aspiring bodhichitta transforms into engaging bodhichitta, which is a mind that actually engages in the practices that lead to enlightenment.

			Enlightenment Omniscient wisdom whose nature is the permanent cessation of mistaken appearance, and whose function is to bestow mental peace on all living beings. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune, Mahamudra Tantra and Modern Buddhism.

			Extreme of attachment Also known as ‘extreme of samsara’, this refers to being attached to the true existence of phenomena, and thus remaining in samsara due to delusion and karma.

			Extreme of fear Also known as ‘extreme of solitary peace’, this refers to being afraid of the sufferings of samsara, and as a result seeking liberation for oneself alone.

			Faith A naturally virtuous mind that functions mainly to oppose the perception of faults in its observed object. There are three types of faith: believing faith, admiring faith and wishing faith. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune, Modern Buddhism and How to Transform Your Life.

			Feeling A mental factor that functions to experience pleasant, unpleasant or neutral objects. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Form realm The environment of the gods who possess form.

			Four noble truths True sufferings, true origins, true cessations and true paths. They are called ‘noble’ truths because they are supreme objects of meditation. They are sometimes referred to as the ‘four truths of Superiors’. Through meditation on the four noble truths, we can realize ultimate truth directly and thus become a noble, or Superior, being. See How to Solve Our Human Problems and Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Four opponent powers Four powers that are essential for successful purification: the power of reliance, the power of regret, the power of the opponent force and the power of promise. See The Bodhisattva Vow.

			Functioning thing A phenomenon that is produced and disintegrates within a moment. Synonymous with impermanent phenomenon, thing and product.

			God ‘Deva’ in Sanskrit. A being of the god realm, the highest of the six realms of samsara. There are many different types of god. Some are desire realm gods, while others are form or formless realm gods. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Hearer One of two types of Hinayana practitioner. Both Hearers and Solitary Realizers are Hinayanists, but they differ in their motivation, behaviour, merit, and wisdom. In all these respects, Solitary Realizers are superior to Hearers. See Ocean of Nectar.

			Hell realm The lowest of the six realms of samsara. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Hinayana Sanskrit term for ‘Lesser Vehicle’. The Hinayana goal is to attain merely one’s own liberation from suffering by completely abandoning delusions. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Humility A virtuous mental factor whose main function is to reduce deluded pride. See The New Eight Steps to Happiness.

			Hungry spirit A being of the hungry spirit realm, the second lowest of the six realms of samsara. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Imputation According to the Madhyamika-Prasangika school, all phenomena are merely imputed by conception in dependence upon their basis of imputation. Therefore, they are mere imputation and do not exist from their own side. See The New Heart of Wisdom.

			Inherent existence An imagined mode of existence whereby phenomena are held to exist from their own side, independent of other phenomena. In reality, all phenomena lack, or are empty of, inherent existence because they depend upon their parts. See Modern Buddhism and The New Heart of Wisdom.

			Ishvara A god who abides in the Land of Controlling Emanations, the highest state of existence within the desire realm. Ishvara has limited, contaminated miracle powers that make him more powerful than other beings in the desire realm.

			Je Tsongkhapa (AD 1357-1419) An emanation of the Wisdom Buddha Manjushri, whose appearance in fourteenth-century Tibet as a monk, and the holder of the lineage of pure view and pure deeds, was prophesied by Buddha. He spread a very pure Buddhadharma throughout Tibet, showing how to combine the practices of Sutra and Tantra, and how to practise pure Dharma during degenerate times. His tradition later became known as the ‘Gelug’, or ‘Ganden Tradition’. See Heart Jewel and Great Treasury of Merit.

			Kadampa A Tibetan word in which ‘Ka’ means ‘word’ and refers to all Buddha’s teachings, ‘dam’ refers to Atisha’s special Lamrim instructions known as the ‘stages of the path to enlightenment’, and ‘pa’ refers to a follower of Kadampa Buddhism who integrates all the teachings of Buddha that they know into their Lamrim practice. See also Kadampa Buddhism and Kadampa Tradition.

			Kadampa Buddhism A Mahayana Buddhist school founded by the great Indian Buddhist Master Atisha (AD 982-1054). See also Kadampa and Kadampa Tradition.

			Kadampa Tradition The pure tradition of Buddhism established by Atisha. Followers of this tradition up to the time of Je Tsongkhapa are known as ‘Old Kadampas’, and those after the time of Je Tsongkhapa are known as ‘New Kadampas’. See also Kadampa and Kadampa Buddhism. See Modern Buddhism.

			Karma Sanskrit word meaning ‘action’. Through the force of intention, we perform actions with our body, speech and mind, and all of these actions produce effects. The effect of virtuous actions is happiness and the effect of negative actions is suffering. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Lamrim A Tibetan term, literally meaning ‘stages of the path’. A special arrangement of all Buddha’s teachings that is easy to understand and put into practice. It reveals all the stages of the path to enlightenment. For a full commentary, see Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Langri Tangpa, Bodhisattva (AD 1054-1123) A great Kadampa Teacher who was famous for his realization of exchanging self with others. He composed Eight Verses of Training the Mind. See The New Eight Steps to Happiness.

			Liberation ‘Nirvana’ in Sanskrit. Complete freedom from samsara and its cause, the delusions. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Living being Any being who possesses a mind that is contaminated by delusions or their imprints. Both ‘living being’ and ‘sentient being’ are terms used to distinguish beings whose minds are contaminated by either of these two obstructions from Buddhas, whose minds are completely free from these obstructions.

			Lord of Death Although the mara, or demon, of uncontrolled death is not a living being, it is personified as the Lord of Death, or ‘Yama’. The Lord of Death is depicted in the diagram of the Wheel of Life clutching the wheel between his claws and teeth. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Lower realms The hell realm, hungry spirit realm and animal realm. See also Samsara.

			Madhyamika A Sanskrit term, literally meaning ‘Middle Way’. The higher of the two schools of Mahayana tenets. The Madhyamika view was taught by Buddha in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras during the second turning of the Wheel of Dharma and was subsequently elucidated by Nagarjuna and his followers. There are two divisions of this school, Madhyamika-Svatantrika and Madhyamika-Prasangika, of which the latter is Buddha’s final view. See Ocean of Nectar.

			Mahayana Sanskrit term for ‘Great Vehicle’, the spiritual path to great enlightenment. The Mahayana goal is to attain Buddhahood for the benefit of all living beings by completely abandoning delusions and their imprints. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Maitreya The embodiment of the loving kindness of all the Buddhas. At the time of Buddha Shakyamuni he manifested as a Bodhisattva disciple. In the future, he will manifest as the fifth founding Buddha.

			Manjushri The embodiment of the wisdom of all the Buddhas.

			Mantra A Sanskrit word, literally meaning ‘mind protection’. Mantra protects the mind from ordinary appearances and conceptions. There are four types of mantra: mantras that are mind, mantras that are inner wind, mantras that are sound and mantras that are form. In general, there are three types of mantra recitation: verbal recitation, mental recitation and vajra recitation. See Tantric Grounds and Paths.

			Meditation Meditation is a mind that concentrates on a virtuous object, and is a mental action that is the main cause of mental peace. There are two types of meditation – analytical meditation and placement meditation. When we use our imagination, mindfulness, and powers of reasoning to find our object of meditation, this is analytical meditation. When we find our object and hold it single-pointedly, this is placement meditation. There are different types of object. Some, such as impermanence or emptiness, are objects apprehended by the mind. Others, such as love, compassion, and renunciation, are actual states of mind. We engage in analytical meditation until the specific object that we seek appears clearly to our mind or until the particular state of mind that we wish to generate arises. This object or state of mind is our object of placement meditation. See The New Meditation Handbook.

			Mental factor A cognizer that principally apprehends a particular attribute of an object. Each moment of mind comprises a primary mind and various mental factors. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Mental stabilization Generally, the terms ‘mental stabilization’ and ‘concentration’ are interchangeable. More specifically, the term ‘concentration’ is used to refer to the nature of concentration, which is single-pointedness, and the term ‘mental stabilization’ is used to refer to the function of concentration, which is stability.

			Merit The good fortune created by virtuous actions. It is the potential power to increase our good qualities and produce happiness.

			Method practic Any spiritual path that functions to ripen our Buddha lineage. Training in renunciation, compassion and bodhichitta are examples of method practices.

			Mind That which is clarity and cognizes. Mind is clarity because it always lacks form and because it possesses the actual power to perceive objects. Mind cognizes because its function is to know or perceive objects. See Clear Light of Bliss, How to Understand the Mind and Mahamudra Tantra.

			Mindfulness A mental factor that functions not to forget the object realized by the primary mind. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Miserliness A deluded mental factor that, motivated by desirous attachment, holds onto things tightly and does not want to part with them. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Mount Meru According to Buddhist cosmology, a divine mountain that stands at the centre of the universe.

			Nagarjuna A great Indian Buddhist scholar and meditation master who revived the Mahayana in the first century AD by bringing to light the teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras. See Modern Buddhism and Ocean of Nectar.

			Negative phenomenon An object that is realized through the mind explicitly eliminating a negated object. There are two types of negative phenomena: affirming negatives and non-affirming negatives. An affirming negative is a negative phenomenon realized by a mind that eliminates its negated object while realizing another phenomenon. A non-affirming negative is a negative phenomenon realized by a mind that merely eliminates its negated object without realizing another phenomenon. See Ocean of Nectar.

			Non-alertness A deluded mental factor that, being unable to distinguish faults from non-faults, causes us to develop faults.

			Non-conscientiousness A deluded mental factor that wishes to engage in non-virtuous actions without restraint.

			Non-existent Traditional examples of non-existents are a horn on a rabbit’s head and a child of a barren woman. A horn on a rabbit’s head, for example, is not established by any valid mind and is consequently a non-existent rather than a conventional (or ultimate) truth. See The New Heart of Wisdom.

			Object of negation An object explicitly negated by a mind realizing a negative phenomenon. In meditation on emptiness, or lack of inherent existence, it refers to inherent existence. Also known as ‘negated object’. See Modern Buddhism.

			Obstructions to liberation Obstructions that prevent the attainment of liberation. All delusions, such as ignorance, attachment and anger, together with their seeds, are obstructions to liberation. Also called ‘delusion-obstructions’.

			Obstructions to omniscience The imprints of delusions, which prevent simultaneous and direct realization of all phenomena. Only Buddhas have overcome these obstructions. Also called ‘obstructions to knowing’.

			Patience A virtuous determination to forbear harm, suffering, or profound Dharma. See How to Solve Our Human Problems.

			Perfection of Wisdom Sutras Sutras of the second turning of the Wheel of Dharma, in which Buddha revealed his final view of the ultimate nature of all phenomena – emptiness of inherent existence. See The New Heart of Wisdom and Ocean of Nectar.

			Permanent phenomenon Phenomena are either permanent or impermanent. A permanent phenomenon is a phenomenon that does not depend upon causes and that does not disintegrate moment by moment.

			Prasangika See Madhyamika.

			Pretension A deluded mental factor that, motivated by attachment to wealth or reputation, wishes to pretend that we possess qualities that we do not possess.

			Pride A deluded mental factor that, through considering and exaggerating one’s own good qualities or possessions, feels arrogant.

			Primary mind A cognizer that principally apprehends the mere entity of an object. Synonymous with consciousness. There are six primary minds: eye consciousness, ear consciousness, nose consciousness, tongue consciousness, body consciousness and mental consciousness. Each moment of mind comprises a primary mind and various mental factors. A primary mind and its accompanying mental factors are the same entity but have different functions. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Proponents of things The Vaibhashika, Sautrantika and Chittamatra Buddhist schools are known as ‘proponents of things’ because they assert that things are truly existent. See Ocean of Nectar.

			Prostration An action of showing respect with body, speech or mind. See The Bodhisattva Vow.

			Pure Land A pure environment in which there are no true sufferings. There are many Pure Lands. For example, Tushita is the Pure Land of Buddha Maitreya, Sukhavati is the Pure Land of Buddha Amitabha, and Keajra is the Pure Land of Buddha Vajrayogini and Buddha Heruka. See Living Meaningfully, Dying Joyfully.

			Purification Generally, any practice that leads to the attainment of a pure body, speech or mind. More specifically, a practice for purifying negative karma by means of the four opponent powers. See The Bodhisattva Vow.

			Refuge Actual protection. To go for refuge to Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha means to have faith in these Three Jewels and to rely upon them for protection from all fears and suffering. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Renunciation The wish to be released from samsara. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Samantabhadra Sanskrit name for ‘All Good One’, a Bodhisattva renowned for his extensive offerings. See Great Treasury of Merit.

			Samkhya A non-Buddhist school, the oldest of the Brahmaic schools. See Ocean of Nectar.

			Samsara This can be understood in two ways – as uninterrupted rebirth without freedom or control, or as the aggregates of a being who has taken such a rebirth. Samsara, sometimes known as ‘cyclic existence’, is characterized by suffering and dissatisfaction. There are six realms of samsara. Listed in ascending order according to the type of karma that causes rebirth in them, they are the realms of the hell beings, hungry spirits, animals, human beings, demi-gods and gods. The first three are lower realms or unhappy migrations, and the second three are higher realms or happy migrations. Although from the point of view of the karma that causes rebirth there, the god realm is the highest realm in samsara, the human realm is said to be the most fortunate realm because it provides the best conditions for attaining liberation and enlightenment. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Sangha According to the Vinaya tradition, any community of four or more fully ordained monks or nuns. In general, ordained or lay people who take Bodhisattva vows or Tantric vows can also be said to be Sangha. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Self An I imputed in dependence upon any of the five aggregates. Person, being, self and I are synonyms. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Self-cherishing A mental attitude that considers oneself to be supremely important and precious. See The New Eight Steps to Happiness.

			Self-cognizer A consciousness that experiences itself.

			Self-grasping A conceptual mind that holds any phenomenon to be inherently existent. The mind of self-grasping gives rise to all other delusions, such as anger and attachment. It is the root cause of all suffering and dissatisfaction. See The New Heart of Wisdom and Modern Buddhism.

			Sense of shame A mental factor that functions to avoid inappropriate actions for reasons that concern oneself. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Six perfections The perfections of giving, moral discipline, patience, effort, mental stabilization and wisdom. They are called ‘perfections’ because they are motivated by bodhichitta.

			Six powers The five sense powers and the mental power. A sense power is an inner power located in the very centre of a sense organ that functions directly to produce a sense awareness. There are five sense powers, one for each type of sense awareness. A mental power is a mind that principally functions directly to produce the uncommon aspect of a mental awareness. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Solitary Realizer One of two types of Hinayana practitioner. See also Hearer. See Ocean of Nectar.

			Spiritual Guide ‘Guru’ in Sanskrit, ‘Lama’ in Tibetan. A Teacher who guides us along the spiritual path. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune and Great Treasury of Merit.

			Stupa A symbolic representation of Buddha’s mind.

			Sugata Another Sanskrit term for a Buddha. It indicates that Buddhas have attained a state of immaculate and indestructible bliss.

			Sukhavati Sanskrit term for ‘Pure Land of Bliss’ or ‘Blissful Land’ – the Pure Land of Buddha Amitabha.

			Superior seeing A special wisdom that sees its object clearly, and that is maintained by tranquil abiding and the special suppleness that is induced by investigation. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Tathagata Sanskrit term for ‘A Being Gone Beyond’, which is another term for Buddha.

			Ten directions The four cardinal directions, the four intermediate directions, and the directions above and below.

			Three higher trainings Training in moral discipline, concentration and wisdom motivated by renunciation or bodhichitta.

			Three Jewels The three objects of refuge: Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel, and Sangha Jewel. They are called ‘Jewels’ because they are both rare and precious. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Three worlds In the context of this text, ‘worlds’ refers to ‘realms’. The ‘three worlds’ are therefore the desire realm, the form realm and the formless realm, which are the three levels within samsara. The desire realm is the environment of hell beings, hungry spirits, animals, human beings, demi-gods and the gods who enjoy the five objects of desire. The form realm is the environment of the gods who possess form. The formless realm is the environment of the gods who do not possess form.

			Training the mind ‘Lojong’ in Tibetan. A special lineage of instructions that came from Buddha Shakyamuni through Manjushri and Shantideva to Atisha and the Kadampa Teachers, which emphasizes the generation of bodhichitta through the practices of equalizing and exchanging self with others combined with taking and giving. See Universal Compassion and The New Eight Steps to Happiness.

			Training the Mind in Seven Points A commentary to Eight Verses of Training the Mind, composed by Bodhisattva Chekhawa. For a translation and full commentary, see Universal Compassion.

			Tranquil abiding A concentration that possesses the special bliss of physical and mental suppleness that is attained in dependence upon completing the nine mental abidings. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			True existence Existence in any way independent of conceptual imputation.

			True-grasping A conceptual mind that apprehends true existence.

			Truth Body ‘Dharmakaya’ in Sanskrit. The Wisdom Truth Body and the Nature Body of a Buddha. The first is Buddha’s omniscient mind, and the second is the emptiness, or ultimate nature, of his or her mind. See Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			Vaibhashika The lower of the two schools of Hinayana tenets. This school does not accept self-cognizers and asserts external objects to be truly existent. See Ocean of Nectar.

			Vajrapani The embodiment of the power of all the Buddhas. He appears in a wrathful aspect, displaying his power to overcome outer, inner and secret obstacles. At the time of Buddha Shakyamuni, he manifested as a Bodhisattva disciple.

			Valid cognizer A cognizer that is non-deceptive with respect to its engaged object. There are two types: inferential valid cognizers and direct valid cognizers. See How to Understand the Mind.

			Vow A virtuous determination to abandon particular faults that is generated in conjunction with a traditional ritual. The three sets of vows are the Pratimoksha vows of individual liberation, the Bodhisattva vows, and the Secret Mantra or Tantric vows. See The Bodhisattva Vow and Tantric Grounds and Paths.

			Wishfulfilling jewel A legendary jewel that grants all wishes.

			Yogi/Yogini Sanskrit words usually referring to a male or a female meditator who has attained the union of tranquil abiding and superior seeing.





Bibliography


			Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche is a highly respected meditation master and scholar of the Mahayana Buddhist tradition founded by Je Tsongkhapa. Since arriving in the West in 1977, Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche has worked tirelessly to establish pure Buddhadharma throughout the world. Over this period he has given extensive teachings on the major scriptures of the Mahayana. These teachings provide a comprehensive presentation of the essential Sutra and Tantra practices of Mahayana Buddhism.

			Books

			The following books by Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche are all published by Tharpa Publications.

			The Bodhisattva Vow A practical guide to helping others. (2nd. edn., 1995)

			Clear Light of Bliss A Tantric meditation manual. (3rd. edn., 2014)

			Essence of Vajrayana The Highest Yoga Tantra practice of Heruka body mandala. (2nd. edn., 2017)

			Great Treasury of Merit How to rely upon a Spiritual Guide. (2nd. edn., 2015)

			Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life How to enjoy a life of great meaning and altruism. (A translation of Shantideva’s famous verse masterpiece.) (2nd. edn., 2018)

			Heart Jewel The essential practices of Kadampa Buddhism. (2nd. edn., 1997)

			How to Solve Our Human Problems The four noble truths. (2005)

			How to Transform Your Life A blissful journey. (3rd. edn., 2016)

			How to Understand the Mind The nature and power of the mind. (4th. edn., 2014)

			Introduction to Buddhism An explanation of the Buddhist way of life. (2nd. edn., 2001)

			Joyful Path of Good Fortune The path to the supreme happiness of enlightenment. (4th. edn., 2018)

			Living Meaningfully, Dying Joyfully The profound practice of transference of consciousness. (1999)

			Mahamudra Tantra The supreme Heart Jewel nectar. (2005)

			Meaningful to Behold Becoming a friend of the world. (6th. edn., 2016)

			The Mirror of Dharma with Additions How to find the real meaning of human life. (2nd. edn., 2019)

			Modern Buddhism The Path of Compassion and Wisdom. (2nd. edn., 2013)

			The New Eight Steps to Happiness The Buddhist way of loving kindness. (3rd. edn., 2016)

			The New Guide to Dakini Land The Highest Yoga Tantra practice of Buddha Vajrayogini. (3rd. edn., 2012)

			The New Heart of Wisdom Profound teachings from Buddha’s heart (An explanation of the Heart Sutra). (5th. edn., 2012)

			The New Meditation Handbook Meditations to make our life happy and meaningful. (5th. edn., 2013)

			Ocean of Nectar The true nature of all things. (2nd. edn., 2017)

			The Oral Instructions of Mahamudra (2nd. edn., 2016)

			Tantric Grounds and Paths How to enter, progress on, and complete the Vajrayana path. (2nd. edn., 2016)

			Universal Compassion Inspiring solutions for difficult times. (4th. edn., 2002)

			Sadhanas and Other Booklets

			Venerable Geshe Kelsang Rinpoche has also supervised the translation of a collection of essential sadhanas, or ritual prayers for spiritual attainments, available in booklet or audio formats.

			Avalokiteshvara Sadhana Prayers and requests to the Buddha of Compassion.

			The Blissful Path The condensed self-generation sadhana of Vajrayogini.

			The Bodhisattva’s Confession of Moral Downfalls The purification practice of the Mahayana Sutra of the Three Superior Heaps.

			Condensed Long Life Practice of Buddha Amitayus.

			Dakini Yoga The middling self-generation sadhana of Vajrayogini.

			Drop of Essential Nectar A special fasting and purification practice in conjunction with Eleven-faced Avalokiteshvara.

			Essence of Good Fortune Prayers for the six preparatory practices for meditation on the stages of the path to enlightenment.

			Essence of Vajrayana Heruka body mandala self-generation sadhana according to the system of Mahasiddha Ghantapa.

			Feast of Great Bliss Vajrayogini self-initiation sadhana.

			Great Liberation of the Father Preliminary prayers for Mahamudra meditation in conjunction with Heruka practice.

			Great Liberation of the Mother Preliminary prayers for Mahamudra meditation in conjunction with Vajrayogini practice.

			The Great Mother A method to overcome hindrances and obstacles by reciting the Essence of Wisdom Sutra (the Heart Sutra).

			A Handbook for the Daily Practice of Bodhisattva and Tantric Vows.

			Heart Jewel The Guru yoga of Je Tsongkhapa combined with the condensed sadhana of his Dharma Protector.

			Heartfelt Prayers Funeral service for cremations and burials.

			The Hundreds of Deities of the Joyful Land According to Highest Yoga Tantra The Guru Yoga of Je Tsongkhapa as a Preliminary Practice for Mahamudra.

			The Kadampa Way of Life The essential practice of Kadam Lamrim.

			Keajra Heaven The essential commentary to the practice of The Uncommon Yoga of Inconceivability.

			Lay Pratimoksha Vow Ceremony.

			Liberating Prayer Praise to Buddha Shakyamuni.

			Liberation from Sorrow Praises and requests to the Twenty-one Taras.

			Mahayana Refuge Ceremony and Bodhisattva Vow Ceremony.

			Medicine Buddha Prayer A method for benefiting others.

			Medicine Buddha Sadhana A method for accomplishing the attainments of Medicine Buddha.

			Meditation and Recitation of Solitary Vajrasattva.

			Melodious Drum Victorious in all Directions The extensive fulfilling and restoring ritual of the Dharma Protector, the great king Dorje Shugden, in conjunction with Mahakala, Kalarupa, Kalindewi and other Dharma Protectors.

			The New Essence of Vajrayana Heruka body mandala self-generation practice, an instruction of the Ganden Oral Lineage.

			Offering to the Spiritual Guide (Lama Chopa) A special way of relying upon a Spiritual Guide.

			Path of Compassion for the Deceased Powa sadhana for the benefit of the deceased.

			Pathway to the Pure Land Training in powa – the transference of consciousness.

			Powa Ceremony Transference of consciousness for the deceased.

			Prayers for Meditation Brief preparatory prayers for meditation.

			Prayers for World Peace.

			A Pure Life The practice of taking and keeping the eight Mahayana precepts.

			Quick Path to Great Bliss The extensive self-generation sadhana of Vajrayogini.

			Request to the Holy Spiritual Guide Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso from his Faithful Disciples.

			The Root Tantra of Heruka and Vajrayogini Chapters One & Fifty-one of the Condensed Heruka Root Tantra.

			The Root Text: Eight Verses of Training the Mind.

			Treasury of Wisdom The sadhana of Venerable Manjushri.

			The Uncommon Yoga of Inconceivability The special instruction of how to reach the Pure Land of Keajra with this human body.

			Union of No More Learning Heruka body mandala self-initiation sadhana.

			The Vows and Commitments of Kadampa Buddhism.

			Wishfulfilling Jewel The Guru yoga of Je Tsongkhapa combined with the sadhana of his Dharma Protector.

			The Yoga of Buddha Amitayus A special method for increasing lifespan, wisdom and merit.

			The Yoga of Buddha Heruka The essential self-generation sadhana of Heruka body mandala & Condensed six-session yoga.

			The Yoga of Buddha Maitreya Self-generation sadhana.

			The Yoga of Buddha Vajrapani Self-generation sadhana.

			The Yoga of Enlightened Mother Arya Tara Self-generation sadhana.

			The Yoga of Great Mother Prajnaparamita Self-generation sadhana.

			The Yoga of Thousand-armed Avalokiteshvara Self-generation sadhana.

			The Yoga of White Tara, Buddha of Long Life.

			To order any of our publications, or to receive a catalogue, please visit www.tharpa.com or contact your nearest Tharpa Office listed here.





Study Programmes of Kadampa Buddhism


			Kadampa Buddhism is a Mahayana Buddhist school founded by the great Indian Buddhist Master Atisha (AD 982-1054). His followers are known as ‘Kadampas’. ‘Ka’ means ‘word’ and refers to Buddha’s teachings, and ‘dam’ refers to Atisha’s special Lamrim instructions known as ‘the stages of the path to enlightenment’. By integrating their knowledge of all Buddha’s teachings into their practice of Lamrim, and by integrating this into their everyday lives, Kadampa Buddhists are encouraged to use Buddha’s teachings as practical methods for transforming daily activities into the path to enlightenment. The great Kadampa Teachers are famous not only for being great scholars, but also for being spiritual practitioners of immense purity and sincerity.

			The lineage of these teachings, both their oral transmission and blessings, was then passed from Teacher to disciple, spreading throughout much of Asia, and now to many countries throughout the world. Buddha’s teachings, which are known as ‘Dharma’, are likened to a wheel that moves from country to country in accordance with changing conditions and people’s karmic inclinations. The external forms of presenting Buddhism may change as it meets with different cultures and societies, but its essential authenticity is ensured through the continuation of an unbroken lineage of realized practitioners.

			Kadampa Buddhism was first introduced to the modern world in 1977 by the renowned Buddhist Master, Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche. Since that time, he has worked tirelessly to spread Kadampa Buddhism throughout the world by giving extensive teachings, writing many profound texts on Kadampa Buddhism, and founding the New Kadampa Tradition – International Kadampa Buddhist Union (NKT-IKBU), which now has over a thousand Kadampa Buddhist Centres worldwide. Each Centre offers study programmes on Buddhist psychology, philosophy and meditation instruction, as well as retreats for all levels of practitioner. The emphasis is on integrating Buddha’s teachings into daily life to solve our human problems and to spread lasting peace and happiness throughout the world.

			The Kadampa Buddhism of the NKT-IKBU is an entirely independent Buddhist tradition and has no political affiliations. It is an association of Buddhist Centres and practitioners that derive their inspiration and guidance from the example of the ancient Kadampa Buddhist Masters and their teachings, as presented by Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche.

			There are three reasons why we need to study and practise the teachings of Buddha: to develop our wisdom, to cultivate a good heart and to maintain a peaceful state of mind. If we do not strive to develop our wisdom, we will always remain ignorant of ultimate truth – the true nature of reality. Although we wish for happiness, our ignorance leads us to engage in non-virtuous actions, which are the main cause of all our suffering. If we do not cultivate a good heart, our selfish motivation destroys harmony and good relationships with others. We have no peace, and no chance to gain pure happiness. Without inner peace, outer peace is impossible. If we do not maintain a peaceful state of mind, we are not happy even if we have ideal conditions. On the other hand, when our mind is peaceful, we are happy, even if our external conditions are unpleasant. Therefore, the development of these qualities is of utmost importance for our daily happiness.

			Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche, or ‘Venerable Geshe-la’ as he is affectionately called by his students, has designed three special spiritual programmes for the systematic study and practice of Kadampa Buddhism that are especially suited to the modern world – the General Programme (GP), the Foundation Programme (FP) and the Teacher Training Programme (TTP).

			GENERAL PROGRAMME

			The General Programme provides a basic introduction to Buddhist view, meditation and practice that is suitable for beginners. It also includes advanced teachings and practice from both Sutra and Tantra.

			FOUNDATION PROGRAMME

			The Foundation Programme provides an opportunity to deepen our understanding and experience of Buddhism through a systematic study of six texts:

			1 Joyful Path of Good Fortune – a commentary to Atisha’s Lamrim instructions, the stages of the path to enlightenment.

			2 Universal Compassion – a commentary to Bodhisattva Chekhawa’s Training the Mind in Seven Points.

			3 The New Eight Steps to Happiness – a commentary to Bodhisattva Langri Tangpa’s Eight Verses of Training the Mind.

			4 The New Heart of Wisdom – a commentary to the Heart Sutra.

			5 Meaningful to Behold – a commentary to Venerable Shantideva’s Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life.

			6 How to Understand the Mind – a detailed explanation of the mind, based on the works of the Buddhist scholars Dharmakirti and Dignaga.

			The benefits of studying and practising these texts are as follows:

			(1) Joyful Path of Good Fortune – we gain the ability to put all Buddha’s teachings of both Sutra and Tantra into practice. We can easily make progress on, and complete, the stages of the path to the supreme happiness of enlightenment. From a practical point of view, Lamrim is the main body of Buddha’s teachings, and the other teachings are like its limbs.

			(2) and (3) Universal Compassion and The New Eight Steps to Happiness – we gain the ability to integrate Buddha’s teachings into our daily life and solve all our human problems.

			(4) The New Heart of Wisdom – we gain a realization of the ultimate nature of reality. By gaining this realization, we can eliminate the ignorance of self-grasping, which is the root of all our suffering.

			(5) Meaningful to Behold – we transform our daily activities into the Bodhisattva’s way of life, thereby making every moment of our human life meaningful.

			(6) How to Understand the Mind – we understand the relationship between our mind and its external objects. If we understand that objects depend upon the subjective mind, we can change the way objects appear to us by changing our own mind. Gradually, we will gain the ability to control our mind and in this way solve all our problems.

			TEACHER TRAINING PROGRAMME

			The Teacher Training Programme is designed for people who wish to train as authentic Dharma Teachers. In addition to completing the study of fourteen texts of Sutra and Tantra, which include the six texts mentioned above, the student is required to observe certain commitments with regard to behaviour and way of life, and to complete a number of meditation retreats.

			A Special Teacher Training Programme is also held at Manjushri Kadampa Meditation Centre, Ulverston, England, and can be studied either by attending the classes at the centre or by correspondence. This special meditation and study programme consists of twelve courses based on the books of Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche: How to Understand the Mind; Modern Buddhism; The New Heart of Wisdom; Tantric Grounds and Paths; Shantideva’s Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life and its commentary, Meaningful to Behold; Ocean of Nectar; The New Guide to Dakini Land; The Oral Instructions of Mahamudra; The New Eight Steps to Happiness; The Mirror of Dharma with Additions; Essence of Vajrayana; and Joyful Path of Good Fortune.

			All Kadampa Buddhist Centres are open to the public. Every year we celebrate Festivals in the USA and Europe, including two in England, where people gather from around the world to receive special teachings and empowerments and to enjoy a spiritual holiday. Please feel free to visit us at any time!

			For further information about NKT-IKBU study programmes or to find your nearest centre, visit www.kadampa.org, or please contact:

			NKT-IKBU Central Office

			Conishead Priory, Ulverston,

			Cumbria LA12 9QQ, UK

			Tel: 01229-588533

			Email: info@kadampa.org

			Website: www.kadampa.org

			or

			KMC New York

			47 Sweeney Road

			Glen Spey, NY 12737, USA

			Tel: +1 845-856-9000

			or 877-523-2672 (toll-free)

			Fax: +1 845-856-2110

			Email: info@kadampanewyork.org

			Website: www.kadampanewyork.org





Tharpa Offices Worldwide


			Tharpa books are currently published in English (UK and US), Chinese, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese and Spanish. Most languages are available from any Tharpa office listed below.



		 			Tharpa UK

			Conishead Priory

			ULVERSTON

			Cumbria,

			LA12 9QQ, UK

			Tel: +44 (0)1229-588599

			Web: tharpa.com/uk

			E-mail: info.uk@tharpa.com

			Tharpa US

			47 Sweeney Road

			GLEN SPEY,

			NY 12737, USA

			Tel: +1 845-856-5102

			Toll-free: 888-741-3475

			Fax: +1 845-856-2110

			Web: tharpa.com/us

			E-mail: info.us@tharpa.com

			Tharpa Asia

			1st Floor Causeway Tower,

			16-22 Causeway Road,

			Causeway Bay,

			HONG KONG

			Tel: +(852) 2507 2237

			Web: tharpa.com/hk-en

			E-mail: info.asia@tharpa.com

			Tharpa Australia

			25 McCarthy Road,

			MONBULK VIC 3793, AU

			Tel: +61 (0)3 9756 7203

			Web: tharpa.com/au

			E-mail: info.au@tharpa.com

			Tharpa Brazil

			Rua Artur de Azevedo 1360

			Pinheiros, SÃO PAULO - SP, 05404-003, BR

			Tel: +55 (11) 3476-2328

			Web: tharpa.com.br

			E-mail: info.br@tharpa.com

			Tharpa Canada (English)

			631 Crawford St.,

			TORONTO, ON M6G 3K1, CA

			Tel: (+1) 416-762-8710

			Fax: (+1) 416-762-2267

			Web: tharpa.com/ca

			E-mail: info.ca@tharpa.com

			Tharpa Canada (Français)

			835 Laurier est Montréal, QC, H2J 1G2, CA

			Tél: (+1) 514-521-1313

			Web: tharpa.com/ca-fr

			E-mail: info.ca-fr@tharpa.com

			Tharpa Chile

			Av. Seminario 589, Providencia,

			SANTIAGO, CL

			Tél: +56 91297091/+56 22 9935053

			Web: tharpa.com/cl

			Email: info.cl@tharpa.com

			Tharpa Deutschland (Germany)

			Chausseestraße 108,

			10115 BERLIN, DE

			Tel: +49 (030) 430 55 666

			Web: tharpa.com/de

			Email: info.de@tharpa.com

			Tharpa España (Spain)

			Calle La Fábrica 8, Majadahonda,

			MADRID, 28221, ES

			Tel: +34 911 124 914

			Web: tharpa.com/es

			Email: info.es@tharpa.com

			Tharpa France

			Château de Segrais

			72220 SAINT-MARS-D’OUTILLÉ, FR

			Tél/Fax : +33 (0)2 52 36 03 89

			Web: tharpa.com/fr

			Email: info.fr@tharpa.com

			Tharpa Japan

			KMC TOKYO, JAPAN

			2F Vogue Daikanyama II,

			13-4 Daikanyama-cho,

			Shibuya-ku, TOKYO,

			150-0034, JP

			Web: tharpa.jp

			Email: info@kadampa.jp

			Tharpa México

			Enrique Rébsamen No 406

			Col. Narvate Poniente,

			CUIDAD DE MÉXICO,

			CDMX, C.P. 03020, MX

			Tel & Fax: +52 (55) 56 39 61 80;

			Tel: +52 (55) 56 39 61 86

			Web: tharpa.com/mx

			E-mail: info.mx@tharpa.com

			Tharpa New Zealand

			2 Stokes Road, Mount Eden,

			AUCKLAND, 1024, NZ

			Tel: +64 09 631 5400

			DD Mobile: +64 21 583351

			Web: tharpa.com/nz

			Email: info.nz@tharpa.com

			Tharpa Portugal

			Rua Moinho do Gato, 5

			Várzea de Sintra

			SINTRA, 2710-661, PT

			Tel: +351 219 231 064

			Web: tharpa.pt

			Email: info@tharpa.pt

			Tharpa Schweiz (Switzerland)

			Mirabellenstrasse 1

			CH-8048 ZÜRICH, CH

			Tel: +41 44 461 36 88

			Web: tharpa.com/ch

			Email: info.ch@tharpa.com

			Tharpa South Africa

			26 Menston Rd., Westville,

			DURBAN, 3629, KZN,

			REP. OF SOUTH AFRICA

			Tel: +27 31 266 0096

			Web: tharpa.com/za

			E-mail: info.za@tharpa.com

			Tharpa Sverige (Sweden)

			c/o KMC Sweden

			Upplandsgatan 18, 113 60

			Tel: +46 (0) 72 251 4090

			Email: info.se@tharpa.com





Index


			The letter ‘g’ indicates an entry in the glossary



		 			A

			Abbot 89

			ablution 17–18

			absorption

			actual 51

			of close preparation 51

			without discrimination

			165, g

			actions and effects 170.

			See also karma

			ageing 191

			aggregates 170, 177

			Akashagarbha 23. See also

			eight Great Sons

			Akashagarbha Sutra 66

			alertness 49–66, 102, 147

			defining characteristic 67

			faults of lacking 53

			analogies

			actor 168

			battle 42–45, 74

			bee and pollen 120

			boat 61, 101

			bodhichitta 7, 33–34

			cotton 113

			doctor, medicine and

			nurses vii, 24, 30, 45, 64,

			67, 103, 163

			dry grass 83

			elephant 49, 55, 111

			elixir 7

			father and son 168, 180

			fire of aeon 8

			fish 101

			foot and hand 135

			honey on razor’s edge 111

			horse and cart 132

			inexhaustible treasury 33

			jar with oil 112

			king’s minister 94–95

			leaky pot 53

			leather 51

			lightning 6

			limbs of body 137

			lion and foxes 110

			lotus 107

			newly-wed 147

			plantain tree 7, 171

			quintessential butter 34

			rising moon 33

			sandcastle 87

			self-cognizers 157–158

			shady tree 33

			snake and crows 109

			snake in lap 113

			stick 78

			stork, cat and thief 61

			supreme medicine 33

			supreme nectar 33

			turtle 40

			universal bridge 33

			vast sun 34

			wild goose 136

			wishfulfilling jewel 161

			wish-granting tree 161

			wood 55, 57

			wound 52

			anger vii, 42, 149, g

			abandoning 51, 57, 72–83

			dependent on causes 74–76

			faults of 71–72

			animals 63, 102, 198

			appearance 154

			Arhat 164–165, g

			Arya 17, g

			ascetics 73, 191

			aspiration, power of 105–108

			aspiring bodhichitta 8, 37, g

			Atisha 233

			atoms 173

			attachment vii, g

			abandoning 56, 57,

			117–123, 148

			extreme of 165, g

			faults of 118, 120, 124–132

			to body 59–60, 80, 123,

			124–131, 139, 148–150

			to causes of suffering 79

			to friends 57, 83, 118–120

			to illusory woman 160

			to reputation 117

			to sexual partner 124–131

			to sleep 99

			to worldly life 117, 132

			to worldly pleasures 25,

			99, 120

			Avalokiteshvara 17, 23, 138,

			198, g. See also eight Great

			Sons

			awareness. See mind

			B

			basis of imputation 178, g

			beggar 89

			beginningless time 19, 132,

			182, g

			Biography of Shri Sambhava 66

			birth 123

			blame vii, 79

			blessings 6, 89, 107, 138, g

			bodhichitta 63, 85, 124, g

			analogies for 7, 33–34

			benefits of 6–11, 33, 104

			faults of abandoning 37–38

			maintaining 15–32

			reasons for benefits 9

			types 8, 37. See also

			engaging bodhichitta

			Bodhisattva 7, 33, 136, 161, g

			object of praise 10–11

			obstructing 38

			Bodhisattva downfalls 38, 39

			Bodhisattva’s way of life

			viii, 63, 65–67, 102, 156

			Bodhisattva vow 39, 67, 80.

			See also vow

			taking 32–33

			bodily conduct 55, 57, 61,

			63–64

			body 53, 78, 80. See also

			attachment, to body

			abandoning attachment to

			59–61, 122, 148–149

			boat-like 61, 101

			cherishing 139

			dream-like 174

			essenceless 60

			giving 31, 63, 102, 103

			impermanence of 40, 122

			impure 7, 60, 124–128, 154

			offering 16, 23

			parts of 172–173

			truly-existent 172

			Brahma 9, g

			Brahmin 161

			Buddha 6, 65, 121, 156, g

			beseeching to remain 30

			countless 39

			doctor 24, 103, 163

			form of 7, 161

			good qualities of 54, 91, 140

			illusion-like 155, 162

			lineage of 33

			nature of living beings 94

			Navigator 7

			no conceptual mind 161–162

			omniscient 54, 63

			pleasing 93

			quotations of 11, 50, 52, 91,

			106, 157

			rarity of 39, 190

			refuge in 23, 105

			repaying kindness of 92–94

			requesting to teach 30

			teachings of. See also

			teachings, of Buddha

			Buddhahood. See

			enlightenment

			burial ground 122, 128, 130

			C

			cause and effect 155–156,

			181–188, 182, 185. See also

			karma

			illusion-like 76, 187

			cessation 188–190

			chakravatin king 95–97, g

			Chekhawa, Bodhisattva vi, g

			cherishing others vi, 62,

			92, 137, 139–141. See also

			equalizing self and

			others; exchanging self

			with others

			childish beings 58, 77, 79,

			119, 121, 140

			Chittamatra 179

			refutation of 156–160

			close placement of

			mindfulness of body

			172–174

			close placement of

			mindfulness of feelings

			174–177

			close placement of

			mindfulness of mind 177

			collection 135, 176

			of merit 99, 104, 161, 192, g

			of wisdom 99, 104, 161, g

			compassion 58, 136, 191, g

			nominally existent 171

			Compendium of Trainings 67

			competitiveness 119

			meditation on 142, 144–145

			concentration 56, 117–148, g

			of the actual absorption 51

			perfection of 52

			Condensed Compendium of

			Sutras 67

			confession 20–21, 26, 93, g.

			See also purification

			confusion 41, 53

			non-deluded 165

			conscientiousness 37, 55,

			113, 150, g

			in abandoning delusion

			42–45

			in abandoning non-virtue

			40–42

			with respect to bodhichitta

			37–39

			consciousness. See also

			mental consciousness;

			mind; sense

			consciousness

			object of 167, 176, 177, 180

			permanent 167

			truly existent 180

			contact 176, g

			contentment 148

			continuum 135, 156

			of person 170

			of suffering 76

			conventional truth 153, 178, g

			craving 78, 165, 176

			criticism 121

			D

			daughter of a childless

			person 158

			death 25, 59, 120, 191. See

			also Lord of Death

			time of 20–21, 41, 80,

			100–101, 123

			dedication 30, 66, 107,

			195–204

			delusion-obstructions 166.

			See also obstructions, to

			liberation

			delusions vii, 117, 190

			abandoning 42–44, 74, 108, 110, 164

			diseases of 24

			enemy 42–45, 112

			faults of 42–43

			fishermen of 87

			illusion-like 45

			manifest 164–165

			opponents to 58

			secondary 56

			thieves of 53

			weapons of 112

			demi-gods 34, 42, g

			demonic forces 190

			Dharma 82, 90, 163, 233, g.

			See also teachings

			holders of 164

			joy of 102, 111

			medicine 24, 64, 67, 163,

			205

			refuge in 19, 23

			root of 106

			vast and profound 64

			Dharma activities 63, 108

			Dharma Jewel 18. See also

			Three Jewels

			Dharma practice vii, 41,

			105, 107, 108, 113

			basis for 39, 60

			directional parts 173

			discouragement 102–104

			distractions 52, 102, 117, g

			overcoming 54–56

			divisive speech 57

			doubt 190

			downfalls 53, 109

			Bodhisattva 38, 39

			dream 21, 81, 176, 186, 188

			dualistic appearance 153, g

			dullness 150

			E

			effort 43, 53, 99–113, 150

			definition 99

			eight Great Sons 23, g

			Eight Verses of Training the

			Mind vi, g

			eight worldly concerns 188, g

			elements 32, 181

			employer example 141

			emptiness 104, 118, 124,

			155, 162. See also lack

			of inherent existence;

			lack of true existence;

			selflessness

			correct view of 150. See

			also wisdom realizing

			emptiness

			fear of 166

			no true existence 186

			of body 171–173

			of emptiness 160

			of mind 176, 177, 180

			path of 189

			enemy 73, 76, 86, 119

			cause of patience 88–90

			cherishing body as 139

			destroying 45, 51

			impermanence of 25

			of anger 72

			of self-cherishing 139

			of the delusions 42–45, 112

			of the self-important view

			110

			engaging bodhichitta 8,

			29–34, 37, 67, g

			enlightened one 139. See also

			Buddha

			enlightenment viii, 102, g

			cause of 6, 91, 95

			nominally existent 171

			path to vi

			small 162

			equalizing self and others

			vi, 102, 133–137

			evil 19, 40, 50. See also

			non-virtue

			abandoning 6, 8

			exchanging self with others

			vi, 102, 137–149

			completing by means of

			action 144–150

			completing by means of

			reflection 142–144

			holy secret 139

			of Buddha 94

			expression of worship 5

			external object 156

			extreme of attachment 165, g

			extreme of fear 165, g

			F

			faith 6, 39, 53, 58, 63, 86, 105, g

			results of 11, 162

			false 169, 186

			falsely existent 135, 154

			fame 87–88

			familiarity 73–74, 137, 138

			father 9, 20, 139, 168

			faults 146

			of others 57

			fear 23, 50, 105

			abandoning 7, 24, 49

			cause of 106, 138

			extreme of 165, g

			of emptiness 166

			of hell 52, 101, 112

			of lower realms 54

			feelings vii, g

			cause of 175–176, 184

			pleasant 165

			refuting permanence of

			184–185

			refuting true existence of

			174–177

			field of enlightened beings

			91

			field of holy beings 62

			field of living beings 62, 91

			field of merit 91

			Foe Destroyer. See Arhat

			form

			and consciousness 176, 179

			illusion-like 154, 156, 159

			truly existent 159, 179

			form realm 51, g

			four noble truths 162, g

			four opponent powers 19–24,

			g. See also purification

			four powers 104. See also

			individual ones

			four unrealistic wishes 101

			friends 72, 73, 76, 82, 88, 189

			impermanent 20–21, 25,

			118, 123

			unreliable 119

			functioning thing 185, 188, g.

			See also thing

			future lives 62, 64, 108, 189,

			204

			G

			Garuda 161

			general principle 169, 183

			refutation of 183–185

			giving 56, 71, 89, 139

			food 11, 63, 103

			happiness 146

			one’s body 31, 64, 102, 103

			perfection of 50, 63

			training in 31–32

			god 9, 34, 42, g

			long-life 101

			of first form realm 51

			good qualities

			of a Bodhisattva 105

			of Buddha 91

			of others 62, 85

			of suffering 73, 74

			our own 62, 85, 86, 146

			grasping at true existence

			160, 189. See also

			self-grasping

			guardians of hell 43, 50, 79,

			87, 94, 147

			guarding the mind with

			alertness 49–66

			defining characteristic 67

			H

			happiness 140, 188

			causes of 62, 73, 106, 140,

			182, 235

			destroying 10, 39

			from Dharma 102, 111

			giving 146

			impermanent 81

			of others 44, 62, 85, 133,

			140, 142

			physical 104

			wish for 52, 134, 148, 189

			hardships, enduring 43–44,

			52, 84, 103, 132, 136.

			See also patience, of

			voluntarily enduring

			suffering

			harm 77, 78, 141

			harmful speech 57, 73, 80

			harmful thoughts 86

			hatred 56. See also anger

			Hearer 104, 204, g

			hell 24, 41, 79, 92, 136, 195–

			198. See also guardians of

			hell

			causes of 11, 40, 42, 79, 95,

			139

			creator of 50

			fear of 52, 101, 112

			hot hells 101, 107

			sufferings of 45, 49, 84,

			101, 112, 132

			hero 74, 110

			higher rebirth 189, 190. See

			also precious human life

			cause of 140

			Hinayana 163

			scriptures 163–164

			human realm 84. See also

			precious human life;

			suffering, of humans

			humility 61, 204, g

			hungry spirit 38, 139, 198, g

			I

			I. See self

			ignorance 20, 78. See also

			self-grasping

			illusion 76, 159, 176, 187

			causes of 155

			illusory woman 160

			impermanence 20–21, 81,

			118, 132, 155, 184

			of body 40, 122

			of enemies 25

			of friends 21–22, 25, 119

			of pleasures 87

			of possessions 81, 121

			of relationships 123

			imputation 159, 168, 170,

			173, 175, 178, g

			independent creator of all

			75, 168, 169, 183

			independent permanent self

			75–76

			inherent existence 154, g

			intention 106, 107. See also

			aspiration

			Ishvara g

			refutation of 181–183

			J

			jealousy 84–85, 119, 125, 146

			meditation on 142–143

			Je Tsongkhapa vi, g

			joy, power of 111–112

			K

			Kadampa vi, g

			Kadampa Buddhism

			233–234

			Kadampa Tradition g

			Kapila 185

			karma 78, 83, 106, 170, 182,

			g

			karmic obstacles 39

			Karnapa, people of 73

			Kashyapa 164

			killing 51, 139

			an illusion 155

			Ksitigarbha 23. See also eight

			Great Sons

			L

			lack of inherent existence 76,

			155. See also emptiness;

			lack of true existence

			of body 124

			of feelings 175

			lack of true existence

			159, 165, 179. See also

			emptiness; lack of

			inherent existence

			of nirvana 156, 188

			of samsara 188

			Lamrim 233, g

			Langri Tangpa vi, g

			laziness 109, 113

			of being attracted to non-

			virtuous actions 101

			of discouragement

			102–103

			of indolence 41, 99–101

			liberation 38, 89, 153, 162, g.

			See also nirvana

			self/solitary 137, 162

			lineage of Buddha 33

			living beings 10, 121, 134,

			178, g

			as limbs 137

			cause of enlightenment 62,

			91

			deceiving 38, 44

			field of 62, 91

			guests 34, 38

			illusion-like 45, 155, 171,

			188

			mother 31

			nature of Buddha 94

			relieving fear of 138

			suffering of 171

			Lord of Death 20–21, 60,

			100–101, 191, g

			messengers of 22, 23

			lower realms 40, 54, 132,

			189, 190, g

			cause of 39, 53, 140

			lower rebirth 38. See also

			lower realms

			M

			Madhyamika 154, 186, g

			magician 160, 187

			Mahayana 163, 190, g

			scriptures 163–164

			Sutras 66–67

			Maitreya 8, g. See also eight

			Great Sons

			male/female 174

			Manjushri 17, 18, 23, 198,

			204, g. See also eight Great

			Sons

			mantra 52, g

			name, of Avalokiteshvara

			138

			materialists, refutation of

			169–170

			Mayadevi 198

			Meaningful to Behold viii

			meditation g

			memory 21, 158

			mental consciousness 177

			mental factor g

			mental stabilization 117–148, g

			mere appearance 154

			merit 16, 22, 66, 107, 161, g

			collection of 161, 192

			destroying 53, 71, 83, 86

			field of 91

			illusion-like 155, 162

			method practices 153, g

			mind 127, g. See also

			consciousness

			analytical 179

			conceptual 161, 178, g

			controlling 51

			grasping at true existence

			160, 178

			guarding the 49–66

			illusion-like 156

			mistaken 153, 178

			nature of 156–160

			not the self 170

			perfections depends upon

			50–52

			source of all fear and

			suffering 50

			truly existent 158, 176

			mindfulness 53, 102, 112,

			147, g

			benefits of 49–50

			faults of lacking 53

			rope of 49

			miserliness 38, g

			moral discipline 49–66, 203

			of benefiting others 63–65

			of gathering virtue 58–62

			of restraint 54–58

			perfection of 51

			mother 9, 20, 93, 106, 139,

			186

			living beings 31

			of Buddha 198

			Mount Meru 42, 59, g

			N

			Nagarjuna 67, g

			natural state of nirvana 177,

			179

			nature of mind 156–160

			negative phenomenon g

			New Kadampa Tradition

			234. See also Kadampa

			Tradition

			nirvana 29, 31. See also

			liberation

			lacks true existence 156,

			188

			non-affirming negative 153

			non-alertness 56, g

			non-conscientiousness 22,

			147, g

			non-existent 187, g

			non-thing 187–188

			non-virtuous actions/non-

			virtues 6, 81, 189, 235. See

			also evil

			abandoning 25, 51

			causes of 75

			results of 40, 79, 84, 105,

			106, 107, 182

			O

			object condition 178

			object of negation 186, g

			obstructions

			to liberation 150, g. See also

			delusion-obstructions

			to omniscience 150, 166, g

			offerings 15–18, 71, 155, 162,

			203

			mentally transformed

			17–19

			one’s body 16, 23

			unowned 15–16

			omniscient wisdom 38, 54

			opponent force, power of 24

			ordained people 63, 203, 204

			P

			pain vii, 74. See also suffering

			causes of mental pain 104,

			106

			causes of physical pain 78,

			104, 106

			parinirvana 30, 65

			partless particles 175, 183

			patience 71–93, g. See also

			patience of not retaliating

			benefits of 72, 94

			objects of 79

			of definitely thinking

			about Dharma 74–75

			of voluntarily enduring

			suffering 73–74. See also

			hardships, enduring

			perfection of 51

			patience of not retaliating

			76–92

			by contemplating our own

			faults 78

			by developing compassion

			77–78

			by overcoming cause of

			anger 77–78

			objections to 80

			peace 234

			Pemapani 197

			perfection of concentration 52

			perfection of effort 51

			perfection of giving 50, 63

			perfection of moral

			discipline 51

			perfection of wisdom 153

			Perfection of Wisdom Sutras

			164, g

			permanent 188, g

			feelings 184

			mind 167

			phenomenon 188

			self 75, 167–170, 181

			person. See self

			pleasure. See worldly

			pleasures

			possessions 130–132, 139

			losing 81, 121

			praise 10, 87–88, 119, 121,

			146, 188

			of holy beings 10–11, 19

			of others 61, 84

			seeking 57

			Prasangika 154, g

			prayer 52, 107, 161

			precepts 45

			precious human life 6, 59,

			87, 102

			brevity of 20, 39

			meaning of viii

			rarity of 40–42, 190

			wasting 40, 105, 132, 141,

			190

			pretension 137, 138

			previous lives 25

			pride 43, 109, 119, 120, g

			abandoning 62, 137, 138

			meditation on 142, 144

			primary mind g

			problems vii, 131, 147. See

			also suffering

			production

			from no cause 181, 187

			of existents and non-

			existents 187–188

			promise 38, 39, 44

			of composition 5

			power of 26

			proponents of things 154,

			164, g

			refutation of 154–156

			prostration 5, 11, 19, 26, g

			Pure Land 107, 195

			purification 15–24, 40, 65,

			79, 104, 105, g

			four opponent powers

			19–24, g. See also

			individual ones

			R

			rainbow 188

			reason for composition 5

			rebirth 155

			refuge 11, 19, 22–24, g

			in Buddha 23, 105

			refutation of Chittamatrins

			156–160

			refutation of general

			principle 183–185

			refutation of Ishvara 181–183

			refutation of materialists

			169–170

			refutation of permanent

			feelings 184–185

			refutation of permanent

			partless particles 175,

			183

			refutation of permanent self

			167–171

			refutation of production

			from no cause 181

			refutation of proponents of

			things 154–156

			refutation of Samkhyas 167,

			181–186

			refutation of self-cognizers

			157–158

			refutation of truly existent

			feelings 174–177

			regret 41

			power of 20–22

			rejection, power of 112–114

			rejoicing 29, 61, 84–85

			reliance, power of 22–23, 65

			reliquary 161

			remaining as impassive as

			wood 55, 57

			renunciation 73, 118, g

			reputation 87–88, 121, 188

			losing 53

			respect 54, 56, 58, 85

			S

			Samantabhadra 17, 18, 23,

			198, g. See also eight Great

			Sons

			Samkhyas g

			refutation of 167–169,

			181–186

			samsara 39, 43, 73, 74, 118,

			131, 159, g

			abodes of 165

			conventionally existent 156

			lacks true existence 188

			sufferings of 99, 189

			Sangha 105, 203, g

			seed and sprout 180, 186

			self g

			continuum of 170

			illusion-like 58

			material 169–170

			merely imputed 170

			permanent 75–76,

			167–171, 181

			truly existent 166

			unfindable 171

			self-cherishing vii, 77, 133, g

			abandoning 139–141,

			145–151

			faults of 137, 139–141, 144,

			148

			fearful spirit 141

			self-cognizer 157–158, g

			self-confidence 107–110

			self-grasping vii, 159, 192, g.

			See also grasping at true

			existence

			abandoning 122, 135, 171

			of body 60, 139

			of self 137–138, 149

			self-important view 57, 108,

			109

			selflessness of persons

			166–171, 176, 177

			selflessness of phenomena

			171–176

			sense awareness 178

			sense of shame 54, 58, g

			sense power 175. See also six

			powers

			servant 16, 60, 93, 146

			sexual partner 77, 124–131

			Shantideva vi

			sickness 40, 53, 73, 74, 139,

			190

			six perfections 50, 63, 107, g.

			See also individual ones

			six powers 175, 177, g

			skill 63

			slander 80

			sleep 65, 99, 113, 150

			Solitary Realizers 204, g

			solitude 117, 120, 204

			benefits of 121–123

			sound 167–169

			spiritual ground 39

			Spiritual Guide 20, 25, 54,

			66, 82, 190, 205, g

			stages of the path. See

			Lamrim

			steadfastness 58

			power of 108–111

			stealing 139

			stupa 18, 82

			Sudhana 8

			suffering vii, 78, 81, 101,

			140. See hell, sufferings of

			caused by delusions 43,

			124, 141, 159

			caused by mind 50

			caused by non-virtue 78,

			105, 182

			good qualities of 73, 74

			illusion-like 76

			no choice 75, 76

			no independent possessor

			135

			of hell. See hell, sufferings

			of

			of humans 78, 84, 106

			of others 189

			of samsara 99, 189

			of worldly beings 132

			relieving others’ 73, 94,

			133–136, 141, 171

			taking others’ 146, 205

			unending 189–191

			wish to be free from vii,

			10, 52, 153

			Sugata 11, 32, 196

			suicide 77

			Sukhavati 195

			superior seeing 117, 175

			suppleness 113

			Supushpachandra 136

			Sutra 66

			Sutra of the Three Heaps 65

			Sutra Requested by Subahu 9

			T

			taking and giving vi, 146, 205

			Tathagata 39, 102, g

			teachings. See also Dharma

			of Buddha vi, 66, 145,

			163–164, 233–234

			of Shantideva 192

			requesting 30

			ten directions 19, 44, g

			thing 154, 155, 181,

			184, 187–188. See also

			functioning thing

			thirty-six impure substances

			128

			three higher trainings 163, g

			Three Jewels 20, 65, 82, g

			three worlds 50, 92, g

			training the mind 52, g

			Training the Mind in Seven Points vi, g

			tranquil abiding 117, 158,

			175, g

			true 159

			true existence 186, g. See also

			truly existent

			grasping at 160, 189

			true-grasping g. See true

			existence, grasping at

			truly existent

			bases 159

			body 172

			cessation 188

			form 159, 179

			mind 158, 176, 178, 179

			production 187

			self 166

			things 160, 184

			Truth Body 5, g

			two truths 153–154, 178–179

			U

			ultimate truth 153, 234. See

			also emptiness

			unhappiness 72, 188. See also

			suffering

			V

			Vaibhashika 163, 164, g

			Vajradotsa Sutra 107

			Vajrapani 23, 197, g. See also

			eight Great Sons

			valid cognizer 178, 184, 186, g

			conventional 155

			vast and profound Dharma

			64

			virtuous actions/virtue 6,

			40, 58, 62

			accumulating 49

			inexhaustible 7

			results of 107, 111

			vow 52, g. See also

			Bodhisattva vow

			W

			wealth 57, 81, 87–88, 131, 148

			losing 53

			wheel of Dharma 233

			wisdom viii, 74, 104, 234.

			See also omniscient

			wisdom; wisdom

			realizing emptiness

			collection of 99, 104, 161, g

			from listening,

			contemplating, and

			meditating 53

			perfection of 153

			wisdom realizing emptiness

			153, 165–166. See also

			emptiness, correct view

			of

			wishfulfilling jewel 61, g

			worldly beings 43, 108, 119,

			121

			perceptions of 155, 186

			sufferings of 132

			worldly life 117

			worldly pleasures 25, 99,

			111, 132, 185

			deceptive 87

			wrong views 106

			Y

			Yogi/Yogini 154, 175, g





The International Temples Project





					 						UK Kadampa World Peace Temple At Manjushri Kadampa Meditation Centre, Ulverston One of many Kadampa Temples established by the author





			The International Temples Project was founded by Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso with the aim to introduce the Buddhist faith and practice of the New Kadampa Tradition publicly, and to exemplify contemporary Buddhist practice through public service.

			It achieves this through building traditional and non-traditional Temples, meditation centres and retreat centres, and through the activities of Kadampa Schools, World Peace Cafés and Tharpa Publications.

			For more information on the International Temples Project, visit kadampa.org/temples.





		 			This book is published under the auspices of the

			NKT-IKBU International Temples Project

			and the profit from its sale is designated for public benefit through this fund.

			[Reg. Charity number 1015054 (England)]

			Find out more:

			tharpa.com/benefit-all-world-peace





Finding Your Nearest Kadampa Meditation Centre


			To deepen your understanding of this book, and other books published by Tharpa Publications, and its application to everyday life you can receive support and inspiration from qualified Teachers and practitioners.

			Tharpa Publications is part of the wider spiritual community of the New Kadampa Tradition. This tradition has a growing number of centres and branches in over 40 countries around the world. Each centre offers special study programmes in modern Buddhism and meditation, taught by qualified Teachers. For more details, see Study Programmes of Kadampa Buddhism (see here).

			These programmes are based on the study of books by Venerable Geshe Kelsang Gyatso Rinpoche and are designed to fit comfortably with a modern way of life.

			To find your local Kadampa centre visit: tharpa.com/centres





